ALDOUS'ffUXEE^
 Brave NewWorld
TUP BOOK^f^^^
BRAVE NEW WORLH REVISITED
A
 Books by Aldoics Huxley
 NOVELS
 ESSAYS
 AND
 BELLES
 LETTRES
 SHORT
 8T0RIES
 The Genius and the
 Goddess
 Ape and Essence
 Time Must Have a
 Stop
 After Many a Sum
mer Dies the Swan
 Brave New World
 Revisited
 Tomorrow and To
morrow and To
morrow
 Heaven and Hell
 The Doors of Per
ception
 The Devils of Lou
dun
 Themes and Varia
tions
 Ends and Means
 Texts and Pretexts
 The Olive Tree
 Collected Short Sto
ries
 Eyeless in Gaza
 Point Counter Point
 Those Barren
 Leaves
 Antic Hay
 Crome Yellow
 Brave New World
 Music at Night
 Vulgarity in Litera
ture
 Do What You Will
 Proper Studies
 Jesting Pilate
 Along the Road
 On the Margin
 Essays New and Old
 The Art of Seeing
 The Perennial Phi
losophy
 Science, Liberty and
 Peace
 Limbo
 Brief Candles
 Two or Three Graces
 BIOGRAPHY
 POETRY
 TRAVEL
 DRAMA
 SELECTED
 WORKS
 Grey Eminence
 The Cicadas
 Beyond the Mexique
 Bay
 —
 Mortal Coils
 Play
 The World of Light
 Rotunda
 The World of Aldous
 Huxley
 Little Mexican
 Mortal Coils
 Leda
 The Discovery,
 Adapted from
 Francis Sheridan
BRAVE
 NEW
 WORLD
 REVISITED
 m
 ALDOUS HUXLEY
 t
 PERENNIAL LIBRARY
 Harper & Row, Publishers
 NEW YORK AND EVANSTON
BRAVI NEW WORLD REVISITED, Copyright © 1958 by Aldous
 Huxley. Printed in the United States of America. All
 rights reserved. No part of this book may be used or re
produced in any manner whatsoever without written per
mission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in
 critical articles and reviews. For information address
 Harper & Row, Publishers, Incorporated, 49 East 33rd
 Street, New York, N.Y. 10016.
 Most of the material in this book was published by NewS"
 day under the title tyranny over the mind.
 Brave New World Revisited was originally published by
 Harper & Brothers in 1958.
 First perennial library edition published 1965 by Harper
 & Row, Publishers, Incorporated, New York.
 library of congress catalog card number: 58-12451
 71-10
CONTENTS
 Foreword
 I
 III
 Over'Population
 n Qvuntity, Quality, Morality
 Over-Organization
 IV Propaganda in a Democratic Society
 V Propaganda Under a Dictatorship
 VI The Arts of Selling
 VII Brainwashing
 VIII Chemical Persuasion
 IX Subconscious Persuasion
 X Hypnopaedia
 XI Education for Freedom
 XII What Can Be Done?
 vii
 8
 15
 18
 30
 38
 47
 58
 68
 77
 85
 96
 108
Digitized by the Internet Archive
 in 2011
 http://www.archive.org/details/bravenewworldreOOOhuxl
FOREWORD
 The soul of wit may become the very body of untruth.
 However elegant and memorable, brevity can never, in
 the nature of things, do justice to all the facts of a
 complex situation. On such a theme one can be brief
 only by omission and simplification. Omission and sim
plification help us to understand
 —but help us, in many
 cases, to understand the wrong thing; for our compre
hension may be only of the abbreviator's neatly formu
lated notions, not of the vast, ramifying reality from
 which these notions have been so arbitrarily abstracted.
 But life is short and information endless: nobody
 has time for everything. In practice we are generally
 forced to choose between an unduly brief exposition
 and no exposition at all. Abbreviation is a necessary
 evil and the abbreviator's business is to make the best
 of a job which, though intrinsically bad, is still better
 than nothing. He must learn to simplify, but not to
 the point of falsification. He must learn to concentrate
 upon the essentials of a situation, but without ignor
ing too many of reality's qualifying side issues. In this
 way he may be able to tell, not indeed the whole truth
 (for the whole truth about almost any important sub
ject is incompatible with brevity), but considerably
viii
 FOREWORD
 more than the dangerous quarter-truths and half
truths which have always been the current coin of
 thought
 The subject of freedom and its enemies is enormous,
 and what I have written is certainly too short to do it
 full justice; but at least I have touched on many as
pects of the problem. Each aspect may have been some
what over-simplified in the exposition; but these
 successive over-simplifications add up to a picture that,
 I hope, gives some hint of the vastness and complexity
 of the original.
 Omitted from the picture (not as being unimportant,
 but merely for convenience and because I have dis
cussed them on earlier occasions) are the mechanical
 and military enemies of freedom—the weapons and
 "hardware" which have so powerfully strengthened
 the hands of the world's rulers against their subjects,
 and the ever more ruinously costly preparations for
 ever more senseless and suicidal wars. The chapters
 that follow should be read against a background of
 thoughts about the Hungarian uprising and its re
pression, about H-bombs, about the cost of what every
 nation refers to as "defense," and about those endless
 columns of uniformed boys, white, black, brown, yel
low, marching obediently toward the common grave.
BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED

—
 —
 I.
 OVER-POPULATION
 a
 In 1931, when Brave New World was being written, I
 was convinced that there was still plenty of time. The
 completely organized society, the scientific caste sys
tem, the abolition of free will by methodical condition
ing, the servitude made acceptable by regular doses of
 induced happiness, the orthodoxies
 chemically
 drummed in by nightly courses of sleep-teaching
 these things were coming all right, but not in my
 time, not even in the time of my grandchildren. I for
get the exact date of the events recorded in Brave New
 World; but it was somewhere in the sixth or seventh
 century a.f. (After Ford). We who were living in the
 second quarter of the twentieth century a.d. were the
 inhabitants, admittedly, of a gruesome kind of uni
verse; but the nightmare of those depression years
 was radically different from the nightmare of the fu
ture, described in Brave New World. Ours was a night
mare of too little order; theirs, in the seventh century
 AJ^., of too much. In the process of passing from one
 extreme to the other, there would be a long interval, so
 I imagined, during which the more fortunate third of
 the human race would make the best of both worlds
 the disorderly world of liberalism and the much too
 3
.
 4
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 orderly Brave New World where perfect efficiency left
 no room for freedom or personal initiative.
 Twenty-seven years later, in this third quarter of
 the twentieth century A.D., and long before the end of
 the first century A.F., I feel a good deal less optimistic
 than I did when I was writing Brave New World. The
 prophecies made in 1931 are coming true much sooner
 than I thought they would. The blessed interval be
tween too little order and the nightmare of too much
 has not begun and shows no sign of beginning. In the
 West, it is true, individual men and women still enjoy
 a large measure of freedom. But even in those coun
tries that have a tradition of democratic government,
 this freedom and even the desire for this freedom seem
 to be on the wane. In the rest of the world freedom for
 individuals has already gone, or is manifestly about to
 go. The nightmare of total organization, which I had
 situated in the seventh century After Ford, has
 emerged from the safe, remote future and is now
 awaiting us, just around the next corner.
 George Orwell's 1984> was a magnified projection into
 the future of a present that contained Stalinism and
 an immediate past that had vdtnessed the flowering of
 Nazism. Brave New World was written before the rise
 of Hitler to supreme power in Germany and when the
 Russian tyrant had not yet got into his stride. In 1931
 systematic terrorism was not the obsessive contem
porary fact which it had become in 1948, and the fu
ture dictatorship of my imaginary world was a good
 deal less brutal than the future dictatorship so
 brilliantly portrayed by Orwell. In the context of
 1948, 198i seemed dreadfully convincing. But tyrants,
 after all, are mortal and circumstances change. Recent
 developments in Russia and recent advances in science
 and technology have robbed Orwell's book of some of
 its gruesome verisimilitude. A nuclear war will, of
 course, make nonsense of everybody's predictions.
OVBR'POPULATION
 5
 But, assuming for the moment that the Great Powers
 can somehow refrain from destroying us, we can say
 that it now looks as though the odds were more in
 favor of something like Brave New World than of
 something like 198i.
 In the light of what we have recently learned about
 animal behavior in general, and human behavior in
 particular, it has become clear that control through
 the pimishment of undesirable behavior is less effec
tive, in the long run, than control through the rein
forcement of desirable behavior by rewards, and that
 government through terror works on the whole less
 well than government through the non-violent manip
ulation of the environment and of the thoughts and
 feelings of individual men, women and children. Pun
ishment temporarily puts a stop to undesirable behav
ior, but does not permanently reduce the victim's tend
ency to indulge in it. Moreover, the psycho-physical
 by-products of punishment may be just as undesirable
 as the behavior for which an individual has been pun
ished. Psychotherapy is largely concerned with the de
bilitating or anti-social consequences of past punish
ments.
 The society described in 1984 is a society controlled
 almost exclusively by punishment and the fear of pun
ishment. In the imaginary world of my own fable pun
ishment is infrequent and generally mild. The nearly
 perfect control exercised by the government is
 achieved by systematic reinforcement of desirable be
havior, by many kinds of nearly non-violent manipula
tion, both physical and psychological, and by genetic
 standardization. Babies in bottles and the centralized
 control of reproduction are not perhaps impossible;
 but it is quite clear that for a long time to come we
 shaU remain a viviparous species breeding at random.
 For practical purposes genetic standardization may be
 ruled out Societies will continue to be controlled post
6
 natally
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 —^by punishment, as in the past, and to an ever
 increasing extent by the more effective methods of
 reward and scientific manipulation.
 In Russia the old-fashioned, 198i'Qtyle dictatorship
 of Stalin has begun to give way to a more up-to-date
 form of tyranny. In the upper levels of the Soviets'
 hierarchical society the reinforcement of desirable be
havior has begun to replace the older methods of con
trol through the punishment of undesirable behavior.
 Engineers and scientists, teachers and administrators,
 are handsomely paid for good work and so moderately
 taxed that they are under a constant incentive to do
 better and so be more highly rewarded. In certain
 areas they are at liberty to think and do more or less
 what they like. Punishment awaits them only when
 they stray beyond their prescribed limits into the
 realms of ideology and politics. It is because they have
 been granted a measure of professional freedom that
 Russian teachers, scientists and technicians have
 achieved such remarkable successes. Those who live
 near the base of the Soviet pyramid enjoy none of the
 privileges accorded to the lucky or specially gifted mi
nority. Their wages are meager and they pay, in the
 form of high prices, a disproportionately large share
 of the taxes. The area in which they can do as they
 please is extremely restricted, and their rulers control
 them more by punishment and the threat of punish
ment than through non-violent manipulation or the
 reinforcement of desirable behavior by reward. The
 Soviet system combines elements of 198^ with ele
ments that are prophetic of what went on among the
 higher castes in Brave New World.
 Meanwhile impersonal forces over which we have
 almost no control seem to be pushing us all in the
 direction of the Brave New Worldian nightmare; and
 this impersonal pushing is being consciously acceler
ated by representatives of commercial and political or
OVER'POPULAnON
 7
 ganizations who have developed a number of new tech
niques for manipulating, in the interest of some minor
ity^ the thoughts and feelings of the masses. The tech
niques of manipulation will be discussed in later
 chapters. For the moment let us confine our attention
 to those impersonal forces which are now making the
 world so extremely unsafe for democracy, so very in
hospitable to individual freedom* What are these
 forces? And why has the nightmare, which I had pro
jected into the seventh century A.F., made so swift an
 advance in our direction? The answer to these ques
tions must begin where the life of even the most
 highly civilized society has its beginnings
 —on the
 level of biology.
 On the first Christmas Day the population of our
 planet was about two hundred and fifty millions
 —^less
 than half the population of modern China. Sixteen cen
turies later, when the Pilgrim Fathers landed at Plym
outh Rock, human numbers had climbed to a little
 more than five hundred millions. By the time of the
 signing of the Declaration of Independence, world pop
ulation had passed the seven hundred million mark. In
 1931, when I was \vriting Brave New World, it stood
 at just under two billions. Today, only twenty-seven
 years later, there are two billion eight hundred million
 of us. And tomorrow—what? Penicillin, DDT and
 dean water are cheap commodities, whose effects on
 public health are out of all proportion to their cost.
 Even the poorest government is rich enough to provide
 its subjects with a substantial measure of death con
trol. Birth control is a very different matter. Death
 control is something which can be provided for a whole
 people by a few technicians working in the pay of a
 benevolent government. Birth control depends on the
 co-operation of an entire people. It must be practiced
 by countless individuals, from whom it demands more
 intelligence and will power than most of the world's
8
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 teeming illiterates possess, and (where chemical or me
chanical methods of contraception are used) an ex
penditure of more money than most of these millions
 can now afford. Moreover, there are nowhere any reli
gious traditions in favor of unrestricted death,
 whereas religious and social traditions in favor of un
restricted reproduction are widespread. For all these
 reasons, death control is achieved very easily, birth
 control is achieved with great difficulty. I>eath rates
 have therefore fallen in recent years with startling
 suddenness. But birth rates have either remained at
 their old high level or, if they have fallen, have fallen
 very little and at a very slow rate. In consequence,
 human numbers are now increasing more rapidly than
 at any time in the history of the species.
 Moreover, the yearly increases are themselves in
creasing. They increase regularly, according to the
 rules of compound interest; and they also increase ir
regularly with every application, by a technologically
 backward society of the principles of Public Health.
 At the present time the annual increase in world pop
ulation runs to about forty-three millions. This means
 that every four years mankind adds to its numbers the
 equivalent of the present population of the United
 States, every eight and a half years the equivalent of
 the present population of India. At the rate of increase
 prevailing between the birth of Christ and the death
 of Queen Elizabeth I, it took sixteen centuries for the
 population of the earth to double. At the present rate
 it will double in less than half a century. And thia
 fantastically rapid doubling of our numbers will be
 taking place on a planet whose most desirable and pro
ductive areas are already densely populated, whose
 soils are being eroded by the frantic efforts of bad
 farmers to raise more food, and whose easily available
 mineral capital is being squandered with the reckless
OVER'POPUUTK>N
 9
 extravagance of a drunken sailor getting rid of his
 accumulated pay.
 In the Brave New World of my fable, the problem of
 human numbers in their relation to natural resources
 had been effectively solved. An optimum figure for
 world population had been calculated and numbers
 were maintained at this figure (a little under two bil
lions, if I remember rightly) generation after genera
tion. In the real contemporary world, the population
 problem has not been solved. On the contrary it is
 becoming graver and more formidable with every pass
ing year. It is against this grim biological background
 that all the political, economic, cultural and psychologi
cal dramas of our time are being played out. As the
 twentieth century wears on, as the new billions are
 added to the existing bijilions (there will be more than
 five and a half billions of us by the time my grand
daughter is fifty), this biological background will ad
vance, ever more insistently, ever more menacingly,
 toward the front and center of the historical stage.
 The problem of rapidly increasing numbers in relation
 to natural resources, to social stability and to the well
being of individuals
 —this is now the central problem
 of mankind; and it will remain the central problem
 certainly for another century, and perhaps for several
 centuries thereafter. A new age is supposed to have
 begun on October 4, 1957. But actually, in the present
 context, all our exuberant post-Sputnik talk is irrele
vant and even nonsensical. So far as the masses of
 mankind are concerned, the coming time will not be
 the Space Age; it will be the Age of Over-population.
 Wecan parody the words of the old song and ask,
 Will the space that you're so rich in
 Light a fire in the kitchen,
 Or the little god of space turn the spit, spit, spit?
10
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 The answer, it is obvious, is in the negative. A settle
ment on the moon may be of some military advantage
 to the nation that does the settling. But it will do noth
ing whatever to make life more tolerable, during the
 fifty years that it will take our present population to
 double, for the earth's undernourished and proliferat
ing billions. And even if, at some future date, emigra
tion to Mars should become feasible, even if any con
siderable number of men and women were desperate
 enough to choose a new life under conditions compara
ble to those prevailing on a mountain twice as high as
 Mount Everest, what difference would that make? In
 the course of the last four centuries quite a number of
 people sailed from the Old World to the New. But
 neither their departure nor the returning flow of food
 and raw materials could solve the problems of the Old
 World. Similarly the shipping of a few surplus hu
mans to Mars (at a cost, for transportation and de
velopment, of several million dollars a head) will do
 nothing to solve the problem of mounting population
 pressures on our own planet. Unsolved, that problem
 will render insoluble all our other problems. Worse
 still, it will create conditions in which individual free
dom and the social decencies of the democratic way of
 life will become impossible, almost unthinkable. Not all
 dictatorships arise in the same way. There are many
 roads to Brave New World; 
but perhaps the straight
est and the broadest of them is the road we are travel
ing today^ the road that leads through gigantic num
bers and accelerating increases. Let us briefly review
 the reasons for this close correlation between too many
 people, too rapidly multiplying, and the formulation of
 authoritarian philosophies, the rise of totalitarian sys
tems of government.
 As large and increasing numbers press more heavily
 upon available resources, the economic position of the
 society undergoing this ordeal becomes ever more pre
—
 11
 OVER-POPULATION
 carious. This is especially true of those underdeveloped
 regions, where a sudden lowering of the death rate by
 means of DDT, penicillin and clean water has not been
 accompanied by a corresponding fall in the birth rate.
 In parts of Asia and in most of Central and South
 America populations are increasing so fast that they
 will double themselves in little more than twenty
 years. If the production of food and manufactured arti
cles, of houses, schools and teachers, could be in
creased at a greater rate than human numbers, it
 would be possible to improve the wretched lot of those
 who live in these underdeveloped and over-populated
 countries. But unfortunately these countries lack not
 merely agricultural machinery and an industrial plant
 capable of turning out this machinery, but also the
 capital required to create such a plant. Capital is what
 is left over after the primary needs of a population
 have been satisfied. But the primary needs of most of
 the people in underdeveloped countries are never fuDy
 satisfied. At the end of each year almost nothing is
 left over, and there is therefore almost no capital avail
able for creating the industrial and agricultural plant,
 by means of which the people's needs might be
 satisfied. Moreover, there is, in all these underdevel
oped countries, a serious shortage of the trained man
power without which a modern industrial and agricul
tural plant cannot be operated. The present educa
book, published in 1957
 tional facilities are inadequate; so are the resources,
 financial and cultural, for improving the existing facili
ties as fast as the situation demands. Meanwhile the
 population of some of these underdeveloped countries
 is increasing at the rate of 8 per cent per annum.
 Their tragic situation is discussed in an important
 The Next Hundred Years, by
 Professors Harrison Brown, James Bonner and John
 Weir of the California Institute of Technology. How is
 mankind coping with the problem of rapidly increas
;
 12
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 ing numbers? Not very successfully. **The evidence
 suggests rather strongly that in most underdeveloped
 countries the lot of the average individual has wor
sened appreciably in the last half century. People have
 become more poorly fed. There are fewer available
 goods per person. And practically every attempt to
 improve the situation has been nullified by the relent
less pressure of continued population growth."
 Whenever the economic life of a nation becomes pre
cariouSp the central government is forced to assume
 additional responsibilities for the general welfare. It
 must work out elaborate plans for dealing with a criti
cal situation ; it must impose ever greater restrictions
 upon the activities of its subjects; and if, as is very
 likely, worsening economic conditions result in polit
ical unrest, or open rebellion, the central government
 must intervene to preserve public order and its own
 authority. More and more power is thus concentrated
 in the hands of the executives and their bureaucratic
 managers. But the nature of power is such that even
 those who have not sought it, but have had it forced
 upon them, tend to acquire a taste for more. "Lead us
 not into temptation," we pray—and with good reason
 for when human beings are tempted too enticingly or
 too long, they generally yield. A democratic constitu
tion is a device for preventing the local rulers from
 yielding to those particularly dangerous temptations
 that arise when too much power is concentrated in
 too few hands. Such a constitution works pretty well
 where, as in Britain or the United States, there is a
 traditional respect for constitutional procedures.
 Where the republican or limited monarchical tradition
 is weak, the best of constitutions will not prevent ambi
tious politicians from succumbing with glee and gusto
 to the temptations of power. And in any country
 where numbers have begun to press heavily upon avail
able resources, these temptations cannot fail to arise.
OVBR'POPULATION
 13
 Over-population leads to economic insecurity and so
cial unrest. Unrest and insecurity lead to more con
trol by central governments and an increase of their
 power. In the absence of a constitutional tradition,
 this increased power will probably be exercised in a
 dictatorial fashion. Even if Communism had never
 been invented, this would be likely to happen. But Com
munism has been invented. Given this fact, the proba
bility of over-population leading through unrest to dic
tatorship becomes a virtual certainty. It is a pretty
 safe bet that, twenty years from now, all the world's
 over-populated and underdeveloped countries will be
 under some form of totalitarian rule
 —^probably by the
 Communist party.
 How will this development affect the over-populated,
 but highly industrialized and still democratic coun
tries of Europe? If the newly formed dictatorships
 were hostile to them, and if the normal flow of raw
 materials from the underdeveloped countries were de
liberately interrupted, the nations of the West would
 find themselves in a very bad way indeed. Their in
dustrial system would break down, and the highly de
veloped technology, which up till now has permitted
 them to sustain a population much greater than that
 which could be supported by locally available
 resources, would no longer protect them against the
 consequences of having too many people in too small a
 territory. If this should happen, the enormous powers
 forced by unfavorable conditions upon central govern
ments may come to be used in the spirit of totalitarian
 dictatorship.
 The United States is not at present an over-popu
lated country. If, however, the population continues to
 increase at the present rate (which is higher than that
 of India's increase, though happily a good deal lower
 than the rate now current in Mexico or Guatemala),
 the problem of numbers in relation to available re
14
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 sources might well become troublesome by the begin
ning of the twenty-first century. For the moment over
population is not a direct threat to the personal free
dom of Americans. It remains, however, an indirect
 threat, a menace at one remove. If over-population
 should drive the underdeveloped countries into totali
tarianism, and if these new dictatorships should ally
 themselves with Russia, then the military position of
 the United States would become less secure and the
 preparations for defense and retaliation would have to
 be intensified. But liberty, as we all know, cannot flour
ish in a country that is permanently on a war footing,
 or even a near-war footing. Permanent crisis justifies
 permanent control of everybody and everything by the
 agencies of the central government. And permanent
 crisis is what we have to expect in a world in which
 over-population is producing a state of things, in
 which dictatorship under Communist auspices becomes
 almost inevitable.
II.
 QUANTITY, QUALITY,
 MORALITY
 IS
 In the Brave New World of my fantasy eugenics and
 dysgenics were practiced systematically. In one set of
 bottles biologically superior ova, fertilized by biologi
cally superior sperm, were given the best possible pre«
 natal treatment and were finally decanted as Betas,
 Alphas and even Alpha Pluses. In another, much more
 numerous set of bottles, biologically inferior ova, ferti
lized by biologically inferior sperm, were subjected to
 the Bokanovsky Process (ninety-six identical twins
 out of a single egg) and treated prenatally with alco
hol and other protein poisons. The creatures finally
 decanted were almost subhuman; 
but they were capa
ble of performing unskilled work and, when properly
 conditioned, detensioned by free and frequent access to
 the opposite sex, constantly distracted by gratuitous
 entertainment and reinforced in their good behavior
 patterns by daily doses of soma, could be counted on to
 give no trouble to their superiors.
 In this second half of the twentieth century we do
 nothing systematic about our breeding; but in our
 random and unregulated way we are not only over
populating our planet, we are also, it would seem, mak
ing sure that these greater numbers shall be of biologi
15
16
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 cally poorer quality. In the bad old days children with
 considerable, or even with slight, hereditary defects
 rarely survived. Today, thanks to sanitation, modern
 pharmacology and the social conscience, most of the
 children born with hereditary defects reach maturity
 and multiply their kind. Under the conditions now pre
vailing, every advance in medicine will tend to be
 offset by a corresponding advance in the survival rate
 of individuals cursed by some genetic insufficiency. In
 spite of new wonder drugs and better treatment (in
deed, in a certain sense, precisely because of these
 things), the physical health of the general population
 will show no improvement, and may even deteriorate.
 And along with a decline of average healthiness there
 may well go a decline in average intelligence. Indeed,
 some competent authorities are convinced that such a
 decline has already taken place and is continuing. "Un
der conditions that are both soft and unregulated,"
 writes Dr. W. H. Sheldon, "our best stock tends to be
 outbred by stock that is inferior to it in every respect.
 • • • It is the fashion in some academic circles to
 assure students that the alarm over differential birth
rates is unfounded; that these problems are merely
 economic, or merely educational, or merely religious, or
 merely cultural or something of the sort. This is Pol
lyanna optimism. Reproductive delinquency is biologi
cal and basic." And he adds that "nobody knows just
 how far the average IQ in this country [the U.S.A.]
 has declined since 1916, when Terman attempted to
 standardize the meaning of IQ 100."
 In an underdeveloped and over-populated country,
 where four-fifths of the people get less than two thou
sand calories a day and one-fifth enjoys an adequate
 diet, can democratic institutions arise spontaneously?
 Or if they should be imposed from outside or from
 above, can they possibly survive?
 And now let us consider the case of the rich, in
QUANTITY, QUALITY, MORALITY
 17
 dustrialized and democratic society, in which, owing to
 the random but effective practice of dysgenics, IQ's
 and physical vigor are on the decline. For how long
 can such a society maintain its traditions of individual
 liberty and democratic government? Fifty or a
 hundred years from now our children will learn the
 answer to this question.
 Meanwhile we find ourselves confronted by a most
 disturbing moral problem. We know that the pursuit
 of good ends does not justify the employment of bad
 means. But what about those situations, now of such
 frequent occurrence, in which good means have end
 results which turn out to be bad?
 For example, we go to a tropical island and with the
 aid of DDT we stamp out malaria and, in two or three
 years, save hundreds of thousands of lives. This is
 obviously good. But the hundreds of thousands of hu
man beings thus saved, and the millions whom they
 beget and bring to birth, cannot be adequately clothed,
 housed, educated or even fed out of the island's availa
ble resources. Quick death by malaria has been abol
ished; but life made miserable by undernourishment
 and over-crowding is now the rule, and slow death by
 outright starvation threatens ever greater numbers.
 And what about the congenitally insufficient organ
isms, whom our medicine and our social services now
 preserve so that they may propagate their kind? To
 help the unfortunate is obviously good. But the whole
sale transmission to our descendants of the results of
 unfavorable mutations, and the progressive contamina
tion of the genetic pool from which the members of
 our species will have to draw, are no less obviously
 bad. We are on the horns of an ethical dilemma, and to
 find the middle way will require all our intelligence
 and all our good will.
III.
 OVER-ORGANIZATION
 El
 The shortest and broadest road to the nightmare of
 Brave New World leads, as I have pointed out,
 through over-population and the accelerating increase
 of human numbers—twenty-eight hundred millions to
day, fifty-five hundred millions by the turn of the cen
tury, with most of humanity facing the choice between
 anarchy and totalitarian control. But the increasing
 pressure of numbers upon available resources is not
 the only force propelling us in the direction of totali
tarianism. This blind biological enemy of freedom is
 allied with immensely powerful forces generated by
 the very advances in technology of which we are most
 proud. Justifiably proud, it may be added; for these
 advances are the fruits of genius and persistent hard
 work, of logic, imagination and self-denial
 —in a word,
 of moral and intellectual virtues for which one can feel
 nothing but admiration. But the Nature of Things is
 such that nobody in this world ever gets anything for
 nothing. These amazing and admirable advances have
 had to be paid for. Indeed, like last year's washing
 machine, they are still being paid for
 —and each in
stallment is higher than the last. Many historians,
 many sociologists and psychologists have written at
 18
OVER-ORGANiZATION
 19
 length, and with a deep concern, about the price that
 Western man has had to pay and will go on paying for
 technological progress. They point out, for example,
 that democracy can hardly be expected to flourish in
 societies where political and economic power is being
 progressively concentrated and centralized. But the
 progress of technology has led and is still leading to
 just such a concentration and centralization of power.
 As the machinery of mass production is made more
 eflScient it tends to become more complex and more
 expensive
 —and so less available to the enterpriser of
 limited means. Moreover, mass production cannot work
 without mass distribution; but mass distribution
 raises problems which only the largest producers can
 satisfactorily solve. In a world of mass production and
 mass distribution the Little Man, with his inadequate
 stock of working capital, is at a grave disadvantage.
 In competition with the Big Man, he loses his money
 and finally his very existence as an independent pro
ducer; the Big Man has gobbled him up. As the Little
 Men disappear, more and more economic power comes
 to be wielded by fewer and fewer people. Under a dic
tatorship the Big Business, made possible by advanc
ing technology and the consequent ruin of Little Busi
ness, is controlled by the State
 —that is to say, by a
 small group of party leaders and the soldiers, police
men and civil servants who carry out their orders. In a
 capitalist democracy, such as the United States, it is
 controlled by what Professor C. Wright Mills has
 called the Power Elite. This Power Elite directly
 employs several millions of the country's working
 force in its factories, offices and stores, controls many
 millions more by lending them the money to buy its
 products, and, through its ownership of the media of
 mass communication, influences the thoughts, the feel
ings and the actions of virtually everybody. To parody
 the words of Winston Churchill, never have so many
20
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 been manipulated so much by so few. We are far in
deed from Jefferson's ideal of a genuinely free society
 composed of a hierarchy of self-governing units
 —"the
 elementary republics of the wards, the county repub
lics, the State republics and the Republic of the Union,
 forming a gradation of authorities."
 We see, then, that modern technology has led to the
 concentration of economic and political power, and to
 the development of a society controlled (ruthlessly in
 the totalitarian states, politely and inconspicuously in
 the democracies) by Big Business and Big Govern
ment. But societies are composed of individuals and
 are good only insofar as they help individuals to real
ize their potentialities and to lead a happy and creative
 life.
 How have individuals been affected by the tech
nological advances of recent years? Here is the answer
 to this question given by a philosopher-psychiatrist.
 Dr. Erich Fronam:
 Our contemporary Western society, in spite of its
 material, intellectual and political progress, is in
creasingly less conducive to mental health, and tends
 to undermine the inner security, happiness, reason
 and the capacity for love in the individual; it tends
 to turn him into an automaton who pays for his
 human failure vrith increasing mental sickness, and
 vrith despair hidden under a frantic drive for work
 and so-called pleasure.
 Our "increasing mental sickness" may find expres
sion in neurotic symptoms. These symptoms are con
spicuous and extremely distressing. But "let us
 beware," says Dr. Fromm, "of defining mental hygiene
 as the prevention of symptoms. Symptoms as such are
 not our enemy, but our friend; 
where there are symp
toms there is conflict, and conflict always indicates
 that the forces of life which strive for integration and
 happiness are still fighting." The really hopeless vie
OVER-ORGANIZATION
 21
 tims of mental illness are to be found among those
 who appear to be most normal. "Many of them are
 normal because they are so well adjusted to our mode
 of existence, because their human voice has been si
lenced so early in their lives, that they do not even
 struggle or suffer or develop symptoms as the neurotic
 does." They are normal not in what may be called the
 absolute sense of the word; they are normal only in
 relation to a profoundly abnormal society. Their per
fect adjustment to that abnormal society is a measure
 of their mental sickness. These millions of abnormally
 normal people, living without fuss in a society to
 which, if they were fully human beings, they ought
 not to be adjusted, still cherish **the illusion of indi
viduality," but in fact they have been to a great extent
 deindividualized. Their conformity is developing into
 something like uniformity. But "uniformity and free
dom are imcompatible. Uniformity and mental health
 are incompatible too. . . . 
Man is not made to be an
 automaton, and if he becomes one, the basis for mental
 health is destroyed."
 In the course of evolution nature has gone to endless
 trouble to see that every individual is unlike every
 other individual. We reproduce our kind by bringing
 the father's genes into contact with the mother's.
 These hereditary factors may be combined in an al
most infinite number of ways. Physically and
 mentally, each one of us is unique. Any culture which,
 in the interests of efficiency or in the name of some
 political or religious dogma, seeks to standardize the
 human individual, commits an outrage against man's
 biological nature.
 Science may be defined as the reduction of multiplic
ity to unity. It seeks to explain the endlessly diverse
 phenomena of nature by ignoring the uniqueness of
 particular events, concentrating on what they have in
 coDMnon and finally abstracting some kind of "law," in
—
 22
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 terms of which they make sense and can be effectively
 dealt with. For examples, apples fall from the tree and
 the moon moves across the sky. People had been observ
ing these facts from time immemorial. With Gertrude
 Stein they were convinced that an apple is an apple is
 an apple, whereas the moon is the moon is the moon. It
 remained for Isaac Newton to perceive what these very
 dissimilar phenomena had in common, and to formu
late a theory of gravitation in terms of which certain
 aspects of the behavior of apples, of the heavenly bod
ies and indeed of everything else in the physical uni
verse could be explained and dealt with in terms of a
 single system of ideas. In the same spirit the artist
 takes the innumerable diversities and uniquenesses of
 the outer world and his own imagination and gives
 them meaning within an orderly system of plastic, lit
erary or musical patterns. The wish to impose order
 upon confusion, to bring harmony out of dissonance
 and unity out of multiplicity is a kind of intellectual
 instinct, a primary and fundamental urge of the mind.
 Within the realms of science, art and philosophy the
 workings of what I may call this "Will to Order" are
 mainly beneficent. True, the Will to Order has pro
duced many premature syntheses based upon in
sufficient evidence, many absurd systems of metaphys
ics and theology, much pedantic mistaking of notions
 for realities, of symbols and abstractions for the data
 of immediate experience. But these errors, however re
grettable, do not do much harm, at any rate directly
 though it sometimes happens that a bad philosophical
 system may do harm indirectly, by being used as a
 justification for senseless and inhuman actions. It is
 in the social sphere, in the realm of politics and eco
nomics, that the Will to Order becomes really dan
gerous.
 Here the theoretical reduction of unmanageable mul
OVER^RGANIZATION
 23
 tiplicity to comprehensible unity becomes the practi
cal reduction of human diversity to subhuman
 uniformity, of freedom to servitude. In politics the
 equivalent of a fully developed scientific theory or phi
losophical system is a totalitarian dictatorship. In eco
nomics, the equivalent of a beautifully composed work
 of art is the smoothly running factory in which the
 workers are perfectly adjusted to the machines. The
 Will to Order can make tyrants out of those who
 merely aspire to clear up a mess. The beauty of tidi
ness is used as a justification for despotism.
 Organization is indispensable ; 
for liberty arises and
 has meaning only within a self-regulating community
 of freely co-operating individuals. But, though indis
pensable, organization can also be fatal. Too much or
ganization transforms men and women into automata,
 suffocates the creative spirit and abolishes the very
 possibility of freedom. As usual, the only safe course
 is in the middle, between the extremes of laissez-faire
 at one end of the scale and of total control at the other.
 During the past century the successive advances in
 technology have been accompanied by corresponding
 advances in organization. Complicated machinery has
 had to be matched by complicated social arrangements,
 designed to work as smoothly and efficiently as the
 new instruments of production. In order to fit into
 these organizations, individuals have had to deindivid
ualize themselves, have had to deny their native diver
sity and conform to a standard pattern, have had to do
 their best to become automata.
 The dehumanizing effects of over-organization are
 reinforced by the dehumanizing effects of over-popula
tion. Industry, as it expands, draws an ever greater
 proportion of humanity's increasing numbers into
 large cities. But life in large cities is not conducive to
 mental health (the highest incidence of schizophrenia,
24
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 we are told, occurs among the swarming inhabitants
 of industrial slums) ; 
nor does it foster the kind of
 responsible freedom within small self-governing
 groups, which is the first condition of a genuine democ
racy. City life is anonymous and, as it were, abstract.
 People are related to one another, not as total person
alities, but as the embodiments of economic functions
 or, when they are not at work, as irresponsible seekers
 of entertainment. Subjected to this kind of life, indi
viduals tend to feel lonely and insignificant. Their ex
istence ceases to have any point or meaning.
 Biologically speaking, man is a moderately gregar
ious, not a completely social animal
 —^a creature more
 like a wolf, let us say, or an elephant, than like a bee
 or an ant. In their original form human societies bore
 no resemblance to the hive or the ant heap; 
they were
 merely packs. Civilization is, among other things, the
 process by which primitive packs are transformed into
 an analogue, crude and mechanical, of the social in
sects' organic communities. At the present time the
 pressures of over-population and technological change
 are accelerating this process. The termitary has come
 to seem a realizable and even, in some eyes, a desirable
 ideal. Needless to say, the ideal will never in fact be
 realized. A great gulf separates the social insect from
 the not too gregarious, big-brained mammal; 
and even
 though the mammal should do his best to imitate the
 insect, the gulf would remain. However hard they try,
 men cannot create a social organism, they can only
 create an organization. In the process of trying to
 create an organism they will merely create a totaK
tarian despotism.
 Brave New World presents a fanciful and somewhat
 ribald picture of a society, in which the attempt to re
create human beings in the likeness of termites has
 been pushed almost to the limits of the possible. That
OyEfl'ORGANIZATK>N
 25
 we are being propelled in the direction of Brave New
 World is obvious. But no less obvious is the fact that
 we can, if we so desire, refuse to co-operate with the
 blind forces that are propelling us. For the moment,
 however, the wish to resist does not seem to be very
 strong or very widespread. As Mr. William Whyte has
 shown in his remarkable book. The Organization Man,
 a new Social Ethic is replacing our traditional ethical
 system
 —the system in which the individual is
 primary. The key words in this Social Ethic are
 "adjustment," "adaptation," "socially orientated
 behavior," "belongingness," "acquisition of social
 skills," "team work," "group living," "group loyalty/'
 "group d3aiamics," "group thinking," "group creativ
ity." Its basic assumption is that the social whole has
 greater worth and significance than its individual
 parts, that inborn biological differences should be sac
rificed to cultural uniformity, that the rights of the
 collectivity take precedence over what the eighteenth
 century called the Rights of Man. According to the
 Social Ethic, Jesus was completely wrong in asserting
 that the Sabbath was made for man. On the contrary,
 man was made for the Sabbath, and must sacrifice his
 inherited idiosyncrasies and pretend to be the kind of
 standardized good mixer that organizers of group ac
tivity regard as ideal for their purposes. This ideal
 man is the man who displays "dynamic conformitar**
 (delicious phrase !) and an intense loyalty to the group,
 an unflagging desire to subordinate himself, to belong.
 And the ideal man must have an ideal wife, highly
 gregarious, infinitely adaptable and not merely re
signed to the fact that her husband's first loyalty is to
 the Corporation, but actively loyal on her own account.
 "He for God only," as Milton said of Adam and Eve,
 "she for God in him." And in one important respect
 the wife of the ideal organization man is a good deal
—
 26
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 worse off than our First Mother. She and Adam were
 permitted by the Lord to be completely uninhibited in
 the matter of "youthful dalliance."
 Nor turned, I ween,
 Adam from his fair spouse, nor Eve the rites
 Mysterious of connubial love refused.
 Today, according to a writer in the Harvard Business
 RevieWf the wife of the man who is trying to live up to
 the ideal proposed by the Social Ethic, "must not de
mand too much of her husband's time and interest.
 Because of his single-minded concentration on his job,
 even his sexual activity must be relegated to a secon
dary place." The monk makes vows of poverty, obedi
ence and chastity. The organization man is allowed to
 be rich, but promises obedience ("he accepts authority
 without resentment, he looks up to his superiors"
 Mtisaolini ha sempre ragione) and he must be pre
pared, for the greater glory of the organization that
 employs him, to forswear even conjugal love.
 It is worth remarking that, in 19Si, the members of
 the Party are compelled to conform to a sexual ethic of
 more than Puritan severity. In Brave New World, on
 the other hand, all are permitted to indulge their sex
ual impulses without let or hindrance. The society de
scribed in Orwell's fable is a society permanently at
 war, and the aim of its rulers is first, of course, to
 exercise power for its own delightful sake and, second,
 to keep their subjects in that state of constant tension
 which a state of constant war demands of those who
 wage it. 
By crusading against sexuality the bosses are
 able to maintain the required tension in their followers
 and at the same time can satisfy their lust for power
 in a most gratifying way. The society described in
 Brave New World is a world-state, in which war has
 been eliminated and where the first aim of the rulers is
OVER^RGANIZATION
 27
 at all costs to keep their subjects from making trouble.
 This they achieve by (among other methods) legaliz
ing a degree of sexual freedom (made possible by the
 abolition of the family) that practically guarantees
 the Brave New Worlders against any form of destruc
tive (or creative) emotional tension. In 198jt the lust
 for power is satisfied by inflicting pain ; 
in Brave New
 World, by inflicting a hardly less humiliating pleasure.
 The current Social Ethic, it is obvious, is merely a
 justification after the fact of the less desirable conse
quences of over-organization. It represents a pathetic
 attempt to make a virtue of necessity, to extract a
 positive value from an unpleasant datum. It is a very
 unrealistic, and therefore very dangerous, system of
 morality. The social whole, whose value is assumed to
 be greater than that of its component parts, is not an
 organism in the sense that a hive or a termitary may
 be thought of as an organism. It is merely an organiza
tion, a piece of social machinery. There can be no value
 except in relation to life and awareness. An organiza
tion is neither conscious nor alive. Its value is instru
mental and derivative. It is not good in itself; it is
 good only to the extent that it promotes the good of
 the individuals who are the parts of the collective
 whole. To give organizations precedence over persons
 is to subordinate ends to means. What happens when
 ends are subordinated to means was clearly demon
strated by Hitler and Stalin. Under their hideous rule
 personal ends were subordinated to organizational
 means by a mixture of violence and propaganda, sys
tematic terror and the systematic manipulation of
 minds. In the more efficient dictatorships of tomorrow
 there will probably be much less violence than under
 Hitler and Stalin. The future dictator's subjects will
 be painlessly regimented by a corps of highly trained
 social engineers. "The challenge of social engineering
 in our time," writes an enthusiastic advocate of this
28
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 new science, "is like the challenge of technical engi
neering fifty years ago. If the first half of the twen
tieth century was the era of the technical engineers,
 the second half may well be the era of the social engi
neers"
 —^and the twenty-first century, I suppose, will
 be the era of World Controllers, the scientific caste
 system and Brave New World. To the question quis
 custodiet custodes?
 —^Who will mount guard over our
 guardians, who will engineer the engineers?
 —the an
swer is a bland denial that they need any supervision.
 There seems to be a touching belief among certain
 Ph.D/s in sociology that Ph.D.'s in sociology will never
 be corrupted by power. Like Sir Galahad's, their
 strength is as the strength of ten because their heart
 is pure
 —^and their heart is pure because they are scien
tists and have taken six thousand hours of social
 studies.
 Alas, higher education is not necessarily a guaran
tee of higher virtue, or higher political wisdom. And to
 these misgivings on ethical and psychological grounds
 must be added misgivings of a purely scientific charac
ter. Can we accept the theories on which the social
 engineers base their practice, and in terms of which
 they justify their manipulations of human beings?
 For example. Professor Elton Mayo tells us categori
cally that "man's desire to be continuously associated
 in work with his fellows is a strong, if not the strong
est human characteristic.'' This, I would say, is mani
festly untrue. Some people have the kind of desire de
scribed by Mayo; others do not. It is a matter of tem
perament and inherited constitution. Any social organ
ization based upon the assumption that "man" (who
ever **man" may be) desires to be continuously asso
ciated with his fellows would be, for many individual
 men and women, a bed of Procrustes. Only by being
 amputated or stretched upon the rack could they be
 adjusted to it.
OVBR-OfiGANIZATION
 29
 Again, how romantically misleading are the lyrical
 accounts of the Middle Ages with which many contem
porary theorists of social relations adorn their worksI
 "Membership in a guild, manorial estate or village pro
tected medieval man throughout his life and gave him
 peace and serenity." Protected him from what, we may
 ask. Certainly not from remorseless bullying at the
 hands of his superiors. And along with all that "peace
 and serenity" there was, throughout the Middle Ages,
 an enormous amount of chronic frustration, acute un
happiness and a passionate resentment against the
 rigid, hierarchical system that permitted no vertical
 movement up the social ladder and, for those who were
 bound to the land, very little horizontal movement in
 space. The impersonal forces of over-population and
 over-organization, and the social engineers who are
 trying to direct these forces, are pushing us in the
 direction of a new medieval system. This revival will
 be made more acceptable than the original by such
 Brave-New-Worldian amenities as infant conditioning,
 sleep-teaching and drug-induced euphoria; but, for the
 majority of men and women, it will still be a kind of
 servitude.
IV.
 PROPAGANDA IN
 A DEMOCRATIC SOCIETY
 II
 "The doctrines of Europe," Jefferson wrote, "were that
 men in numerous associations cannot be restrained
 within the limits of order and justice, except by forces
 physical and moral wielded over them by authorities
 independent of their will. • . . 
We (the founders of
 the new American democracy) believe that man was a
 rational animal, endowed by nature with rights, and
 with an innate sense of justice, and that he could be
 restrained from wrong, and protected in right, by mod
erate powers, confided to persons of his own choice and
 held to their duties by dependence on his own will." To
 post-Freudian ears, this kind of language seems touch
ingly quaint and ingenuous. Human beings are a good
 deal less rational and innately just than the optimists
 of the eighteenth century supposed. On the other hand
 they are neither so morally blind nor so hopelessly
 unreasonable as the pessimists of the twentieth would
 have us believe. In spite of the Id and the Un
conscious, in spite of endemic neurosis and the prev
alence of low IQ's, most men and women are probably
 decent enough and sensible enough to be trusted with
 the direction of their own destinies.
 Democratic institutions are devices for reconciling
 30
PROPAGANDA IN A DEMOCRATIC SOCIETY
 31
 QQcial order with individual freedom and initiative,
 and for making the immediate power of a country's
 rulers subject to the ultimate power of the ruled. The
 fact that, in Western Europe and America, these de
vices have worked, all things considered, not too badly
 is proof enough that the eighteenth-century optimists
 were not entirely wrong. Given a fair chance, human
 beings can govern themselves, and govern themselves
 better, though perhaps with less mechanical elBSciency,
 than they can be governed by "authorities independent
 of their will." Given a fair chance, I repeat; for the
 fair chance is an indispensable prerequisite. No people
 that passes abruptly from a state of subservience im
der the rule of a despot to the completely unfamiliar
 state of political independence can be said to have a
 fair chance of making democratic institutions work.
 Again, no people in a precarious economic condition
 has a fair chance of being able to govern itself demo
cratically. Liberalism flourishes in an atmosphere of
 prosperity and declines as declining prosperity makes
 it necessary for the government to intervene ever more
 frequently and drasticaUy in the affairs of its subjects.
 Over-population and over-organization are two condi
tions which, as I have already pointed out, deprive a
 society of a fair chance of making democratic institu
tions work effectively. We see, then, that there are
 certain historical, economic, demographic and techno
logical conditions which make it very hard for
 Jefferson's rational animals, endowed by nature with
 inalienable rights and an innate sense of justice, to
 exercise their reason, claim their rights and act justly
 within a democratically organized society. We in the
 West have been supremely fortunate in having been
 given our fair chance of making the great experiment
 in self-government. Unfortunately it now looks as
 though, owing to recent changes in our circumstances,
 this infinitely precious fair chance were being, little by
32
 BRAV€ NEW WORLD REVISITED
 little, taken away from us. And this, of course, is not
 the whole story. These blind impersonal forces are not
 the only enemies of individual liberty and democratic
 institutions. There are also forces of another, less ab
stract character, forces that can be deliberately used
 by power-seeking individuals whose aim is to establish
 partial or complete control over their fellows. Fifty
 years a^, when I was a boy, it seemed completely self
evident that the bad old days were over, that torture
 and massacre, slavery, and the persecution of heretics,
 were things of the past. Among people who wore top
 hats, traveled in trains, and took a bath every morning
 such horrors were simply out of the question. After
 all, we were living in the twentieth century. A few
 years later these people who took daily baths and went
 to church in top hats were committing atrocities on a
 scale undreamed of by the benighted Africans and Asi
atics. In the light of recent history it would be foolish
 to suppose that this sort of thing cannot happen
 again. It can and, no doubt, it will. But in the immedi
ate future there is some reason to believe that the
 punitive methods of 198i will give place to the rein
forcements and manipulations of Brave New World.
 There are two kinds of propaganda—rational propa
ganda in favor of action that is consonant with the
 enlightened self-interest of those who make it and
 those to whom it is addressed, and non-rational propa
ganda that is not consonant with anybody's enlight
ened self-interest, but is dictated by, and appeals to,
 passion. Where the actions of individuals are con
cerned there are motives more exalted than enlight
ened self-interest, but where collective action has to be
 taken in the fields of politics and economics, enlight
ened self-interest is probably the highest of effective
 motives. If politicians and their constituents always
 acted to promote their own or their country's long
range self-interest, this world would be an earthly par
PROPAGANDA fN A DEMOCRATIC SOCtBTY
 33
 adise. As it is, they often act against their own inter
ests, merely to gratify their least creditable passions;
 the world, in consequence, is a place of misery. Propa
ganda in favor of action that is consonant with en
lightened self-interest appeals to reason by means of
 logical arguments based upon the best available evi
dence fully and honestly set forth. Propaganda in fa
vor of action dictated by the impulses that are below
 self-interest offers false, garbled or incomplete evi
dence, avoids logical argument and seeks to influence
 its victims by the mere repetition of catchwords, by
 the furious denunciation of foreign or domestic scape
goats, and by cunningly associating the lowest pas
sions with the highest ideals, so that atrocities come to
 be perpetrated in the name of God and the most cyni
cal kind of Realpolitik is treated as a matter of reli
gious principle and patriotic duty.
 In John Dewey's words, "a renewal of faith in com
mon human nature, in its potentialities in general, and
 in its power in particular to respond to reason and
 truth, is a surer bulwark against totalitarianism than
 a demonstration of material success or a devout wor
ship of special legal and political forms." The power to
 respond to reason and truth exists in all of us. But so,
 unfortunately, does the tendency to respond to unrea
son and falsehood
 —^particularly in those cases where
 the falsehood evokes some enjoyable emotion, or where
 the appeal to unreason strikes some answering chord
 in the primitive, subhuman depths of our being. In
 certain fields of activity men have learned to respond
 to reason and truth pretty consistently. The authors of
 learned articles do not appeal to the passions of their
 fellow scientists and technologists. They set forth
 what, to the best of their knowledge, is the truth about
 some particular aspect of reality, they use reason to
 explain the facts they have observed and they support
 their point of view with arguments that appeal to rea
34
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 son in other people. All this is fairly easy in the fields
 of physical science and technology. It is much more
 difficult in the fields of politics and religion and ethics.
 Here the relevant facts often elude us. As for the
 meaning of the facts, that of course depends upon the
 particular system of ideas, in terms of which you
 choose to interpret them. And these are not the only
 difficulties that confront the rational truth-seeker. In
 public and in private life, it often happens that there
 is simply no time to collect the relevant facts or to
 weigh their significance. We are forced to act on
 insufficient evidence and by a light considerably less
 steady than that of logic With the best will in the
 world, we cannot always be completely truthful or con
sistently rational. All that is in our power is to be as
 truthful and rational as circumstances permit us to be,
 and to respond as well as we can to the limited truth
 and imperfect reasonings offered for our consideration
 .
 . .
 by others.
 "If a nation expects to be ignorant and free,*' said
 Jefferson, "it expects what never was and never will be.
 The people cannot be safe without information.
 Where the press is free, and every man able to read, all
 is safe." Across the Atlantic another passionate be
liever in reason was thinking about the same time, in
 almost precisely similar terms. Here is what John
 Stuart Mill wrote of his father, the utilitarian philoso
pher, James Mill: "So complete was his reliance upon
 the influence of reason over the minds of mankind,
 whenever it is allowed to reach them, that he felt as if
 all would be gained, if the whole population were able
 to read, and if all sorts of opinions were allowed to be
 addressed to them by word or in writing, and if by the
 suffrage they could nominate a legislature to give
 effect to the opinions they had adopted." AU is safe, aJl
 would he gained! Once more we hear the note of eight
eenth-century optimism. Jefferson, it is true, was a
35
 PROPAGANDA IN A DEMOCRATIC SOCIETY
 realist as well as an optimist. He knew by bitter expe
rience that the freedom of the press can be shamefully
 abused. "Nothing," he declared, "can now be believed
 which is seen in a newspaper." And yet, he insisted
 (and we can only agree with him), 
"within the pale of
 truth, the press is a noble institution, equally the
 friend of science and civil liberty." Mass conmiu
nication, in a word, is neither good nor bad; it is
 simply a force and, like any other force, it can be used
 either well or ill. Used in one way, the press, the radio
 and the cinema are indispensable to the survival of
 democracy. Used in another way, they are among the
 most powerful weapons in the dictator's armory. In
 the field of mass communications as in almost every
 other field of enterprise, technological progress has
 hurt the Little Man and helped the Big Man. As lately
 as fifty years ago, every democratic country could
 boast of a great number of small journals and local
 newspapers. Thousands of country editors expressed
 thousands of independent opinions. Somewhere or
 other almost anybody could get almost anything
 printed. Today the press is still legally free; 
but most
 of the little papers have disappeared. The cost of wood
pulp, of modem printing machinery and of syndicated
 news is too high for the Little Man. In the totalitarian
 East there is political censorship, and the media of
 mass communication are controlled by the State. In
 the democratic West there is economic censorship and
 the media of mass communication are controlled by
 members of the Power Elite. Censorship by rising
 costs and the concentration of communication power
 in the hands of a few big concerns is less objectionable
 than State ownership and government propaganda;
 but certainly it is not something of which a
 Jeffersonian democrat could possibly approve.
 In regard to propaganda the early advocates of uni
versal literacy and a free press envisaged only two
U
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 possibilities: the propaganda might be true, or it
 might be false. They did not foresee what in fact has
 happened, above all in our Western capitalist democra
cies
 —the development of a vast mass conmiunicatlona
 industry, concerned in the main neither with the true
 nor the false, but with the unreal, the more or less
 totally irrelevant. In a word, they failed to take into
 account man's almost infinite appetite for distractions.
 In the past most people never got a chance of fully
 satisfying this appetite. They might long for distrac
tions, but the distractions were not provided.
 Christmas came but once a year, feasts were "solemn
 and rare," there were few readers and very little to
 read, and the nearest approach to a neighborhood
 movie theater was the parish church, where the per
formances, though frequent, were somewhat monoto
nous. For conditions even remotely comparable to
 those now prevailing we must return to imperial
 Rome, where the populace was kept in good humor by
 frequent, gratuitous doses of many kinds of entertain
ment—from poetical dramas to gladiatorial fights,
 from recitations of Virgil to all-out boxing, from con
certs to military reviews and public executions. But
 even in Rome there was nothing like the non-stop dis
traction now provided by newspapers and magazines,
 by radio, television and the cinema. In Brave New
 World non-stop distractions of the most fascinating
 nature (the feelies, orgy-porgy, centrifugal bumble
puppy) are deliberately used as instruments of policy,
 for the purpose of preventing people from paying too
 much attention to the realities of the social and polit
ical situation. The other world of religion is different
 from the other world of entertainment; but they resem
ble one another in being most decidedly "not of this
 world." Both are distractions and, if lived in too con
tinuously, both can become, in Marx's phrase, "the
 opium of the people" and so a threat to freedom. Only
PROPAGANDA IN A DEMOCRATIC SOCIETY
 37
 the vigilant can maintain their liberties, and only
 those who are constantly and intelligently on the spot
 can hope to govern themselves effectively by demo
cratic procedures. A society, most of whose members
 spend a great part of their time, not on the spot, not
 here and now and in the calculable future, but some
where else, in the irrelevant other worlds of sport and
 soap opera, of mythology and metaphysical fantasy,
 will find it hard to resist the encroachments of those
 who would manipulate and control it.
 In their propaganda today's dictators rely for the
 most part on repetition, suppression and rationaliza
tion
 —^the repetition of catchwords which they wish to
 be accepted as true, the suppression of facts which
 they wish to be ignored, the arousal and rationaliza
tion of passions which may be used in the interests of
 the Party or the State. As the art and science of manip
ulation come to be better understood, the dictators of
 the future will doubtless learn to combine these tech
niques with the non-stop distractions which, in the
 West, are now threatening to drown in a sea of irrele
vance the rational propaganda essential to the mainten
ance of individual liberty and the survival of demo
cratic institutions.
V.
 PROPAGANDA UNDER
 A DICTATORSHIP
 At his trial after the Second World War, Hitler's Min
ister for Armaments, Albert Speer, delivered a long
 speech in which, with remarkable acuteness, he de
scribed the Nazi tyranny and analyzed its methods.
 "Hitler's dictatorship," he said, "differed in one funda
mental point from all its predecessors in history. It
 was the first dictatorship in the present period of mod
em technical development, a dictatorship which made
 complete use of all technical means for the domination
 of its own country. Through technical devices like the
 radio and the loud-speaker, eighty million people were
 deprived of independent thought It was thereby possi
ble to subject them to the will of one man. . . . 
Earlier
 dictators needed highly qualified assistants even at the
 lowest level
 —^men who could think and act inde
pendently- The totalitarian system in the period of
 modem technical development can dispense with such
 men; thanks to modem methods of communication, it
 is possible to mechanize the lower leadership. As a
 result of this there has arisen the new type of the
 uncritical recipient of orders."
 In the Brave New World of my prophetic fable tech
nology had advanced far beyond the point it had
 38
PROPAGANDA UNDiR A DiCTATORSHIP
 39
 reached in Hitler's day; consequently the recipients of
 orders were far less critical than their Nazi counter
parts, far more obedient to the order-jsriving elite.
 Moreover, they had been genetically standardized and
 postnatally conditioned to perform their subordinate
 functions, and could therefore be depended upon to
 behave almost as predictably as machines. As we shall
 see in a later chapter, this conditioning of "the lower
 leadership" is already going on under the Communist
 dictatorships. The Chinese and the Russians are not
 relying merely on the indirect effects of advancing
 technology; they are working directly on the psycho
physical organisms of their lower leaders, subjecting
 minds and bodies to a system of ruthless and, from all
 accounts, highly effective conditioning. "Many a man,"
 said Speer, **has been haunted by the nightmare that
 one day nations might be dominated by technical
 means. That nightmare was almost realized in Hitler's
 totalitarian system." Almost, but not quite. The Nazis
 did not have time
 —^and perhaps did not have the intel
ligence and the necessary knowledge—to brainwash
 and condition their lower leadership. This, it may be,
 is one of the reasons why they failed.
 Since Hitler's day the armory of technical devices at
 the disposal of the would-be dictator has been con
siderably enlarged. As well as the radio, the loud
speaker, the moving picture camera and the rotary
 press, the contemporary propagandist can make use of
 television to broadcast the image as well as the voice
 of his client, and can record both image and voice on
 spools of magnetic tape. Thanks to technological prog
ress, Big Brother can now be almost as omnipresent as
 God. Nor is it only on the technical front that the
 hand of the would-be dictator has been strengthened.
 Since Hitler's day a great deal of work has been car
ried out in those fields of applied psychology and neu
rology which are the special province of the propagan
40
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 dist, the indoctrinator and the brainwasher. In the
 past these specialists in the art of changing people's
 minds were empiricists. By a method of trial and error
 they had worked out a number of techniques and proce
dures, which they used very effectively without, how
ever, knowing precisely why they were effective. Today
 the art of mind-control is in the process of becoming a
 science. The practitioners of this science know what
 they are doing and why. They are guided in their work
 by theories and hypotheses solidly established on a
 massive foundation of experimental evidence. Thanks
 to the new insights and the new techniques made possi
ble by these insights, the nightmare that was "all but
 realized in Hitler's totalitarian system" may soon be
 completely realizable.
 But before we discuss these new insights and tech
niques let us take a look at the nightmare that so nearly
 came true in Nazi Germany. What were the methods
 used by Hitler and Goebbels for "depriving eighty mil
lion people of independent thought and subjecting
 them to the will of one man"? And what was the
 theory of human nature upon which those terrifyingly
 successful methods were based? These questions can
 be answered, for the most part, in Hitler's own words.
 And what remarkably clear and astute words they areI
 When he writes about such vast abstractions as Race
 and History and Providence, Hitler is strictly imreada
ble. But when he writes about the (Jerman masses and
 the methods he used for dominating and directing
 them, his style changes. Nonsense gives place to sense,
 bombast to a hard-boiled and cynical lucidity. In his
 philosophical lucubrations Hitler was either cloudily
 daydreaming or reproducing other people's half-baked
 notions. In his comments on crowds and propaganda
 he was writing of things he knew by firsthand expe
rience. In the words of his ablest biographer, Mr. Alan
 Bullock, "Hitler was the greatest demagogue in his
PROPAGANDA UNDER A DICTATORSHIP
 41
 tory." Those who add, "only a demagogrue/' fail to
 appreciate the nature of political power in an age of
 mass politics. As he himself said, "To be a leader
 means to be able to move the masses." Hitler's aim
 was first to move the masses and then, having pried
 them loose from their traditional loyalties and morali
ties, to impose upon them (with the hypnotized con
sent of the majority) a new authoritarian order of his
 own devising. "Hitler," wrote Hermann Rauschning in
 1939, "has a deep respect for the Catholic church and
 the Jesuit order; not because of their Christian doc
trine, but because of the 'machinery' they have elab
orated and controlled, their hierarchical system, their
 extremely clever tactics, their knowledge of human na
ture and their wise use of human weaknesses in ruling
 over believers." Ecclesiasticism without Christianity^
 the discipline of a monastic rule, not for (Jod's sake or
 in order to achieve personal salvation, but for the sake
 of the State and for the greater glory and power of the
 demagogue turned Leader
 —^this was the goal toward
 which the systematic moving of the masses was to
 lead.
 Let us see what Hitler thought of the masses he
 moved and how he did the moving. The first principle
 from which he started was a value judgment: the
 masses are utterly contemptible. They are incapable of
 abstract thinking and uninterested in any fact outside
 the circle of their immediate experience. Their behav
ior is determined, not by knowledge and reason, but by
 feelings and unconscious drives. It is in these drives
 and feelings that "the roots of their positive as well as
 their negative attitudes are implanted." To be success
ful a propagandist must learn how to manipulate these
 instincts and emotions. "The driving force which has
 brought about the most tremendous revolutions on
 this earth has never been a body of scientific teaching
 which has gained power over the masses, but always a
42
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 devotion which has inspired them, and often a kind of
 hysteria which has urged them into action. Whoever
 wishes to win over the masses must know the key that
 will open the door of their hearts." ... In post-Freud
ian jargon, of their unconscious.
 Hitler made his strongest appeal to those members
 of the lower middle classes who had been ruined by the
 inflation of 1923, and then ruined all over again by
 the depression of 1929 and the following years. "The
 masses" of whom he speaks were these bewildered,
 frustrated and chronically anxious millions. To make
 them more masslike, more homogeneously subhuman,
 he assembled them, by the thousands and the tens of
 thousands, in vast halls and arenas, where individuals
 could lose their personal identity, even their ele
mentary humanity, and be merged with the crowd. A
 man or woman makes direct contact with society in
 two ways: as a member of some familial, professional
 or religious group, or as a member of a crowd. Groups
 are capable of being as moral and intelligent as the
 individuals who form them; a crowd is chaotic, has no
 purpose of its own and is capable of anything except
 intelligent action and realistic thinking. Assembled in
 a crowd, people lose their powers of reasoning and
 their capacity for moral choice. Their suggestibility is
 increased to the point where they cease to have any
 judgment or will of their own. They become very ex
citable, they lose all sense of individual or collective
 responsibility, they are subject to sudden accesses of
 rage, enthusiasm and panic. In a word, a man in a
 crowd behaves as though he had swallowed a large
 dose of some powerful intoxicant. He is a victim of
 what I have called "herd-poisoning." Like alcohol,
 herd-poison is an active, extraverted drug. The crowd
intoxicated individual escapes from responsibility, in
telligence and morality into a kind of frantic, animal
 mindlessness.
PROPAGANDA UNDER A DICTATORSHIP
 43
 During his long career as an agitator, Hitler had
 studied the effects of herd-poison and had learned how
 to exploit them for his own purposes. He had dis
covered that the orator can appeal to those **hidden
 forces" which motivate men's actions, much more effec
tively than can the writer. Reading is a private, not a
 collective activity. The writer speaks only to indi
viduals, sitting by themselves in a state of normal
 sobriety. The orator speaks to masses of individuals,
 already well primed with herd-poison. They are at his
 mercy and, if he knows his business, he can do what
 he likes with them. As an orator. Hitler knew his busi
ness supremely well. He was able, in his own words,
 **to follow the lead of the great mass in such a way
 that from the living emotion of his hearers the apt
 word which he needed would be suggested to him and
 in its turn this would go straight to the heart of his
 hearers." Otto Strasser called him "a loud-si>eaker, pro
claiming the most secret desires, the least admissible
 instincts, the sufferings and personal revolts of a
 whole nation." Twenty years before Madison Avenue
 embarked upon "Motivational Research," Hitler was
 systematically exploring and exploiting the secret
 fears and hopes, the cravings, anxieties and frustra
tions of the German masses. It is by manipulating
 "hidden forces" that the advertising experts induce us
 to buy their wares
 —^a toothpaste, a brand of ciga
rettes, a political candidate. And it is by appealing to
 the same hidden forces
 —and to others too dangerous
 for Madison Avenue to meddle with
 —^that Hitler in
duced the German masses to buy themselves a
 Fuehrer, an insane philosophy and the Second World
 War.
 Unlike the masses, inteUectuals have a taste for ra
tionality and an interest in facts. Their critical habit
 of mind makes them resistant to the kind of propa
ganda that works so well on the majority. Among the
44
 faith. . . .
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 masses "instinct is supreme, and from instinct comes
 While the healthy conmion folk instinc
tively close their ranks to form a community of the
 people" (under a Leader, it goes without saying) "in
tellectuals run this way and that, like hens in a poul
try yard. With them one cannot make history; they
 cannot be used as elements composing a community."
 Intellectuals are the kind of people who demand evi
dence and are shocked by logical inconsistencies and
 fallacies. They regard over-simplification as the origi
nal sin of the mind and have no use for the slogans,
 the unqualified assertions and sweeping generaliza
tions which are the propagandist's stock in trade. "All
 effective propaganda," Hitler wrote, "must be confined
 to a few bare necessities and then must be expressed
 in a few stereotjnped formulas." These stereotyped for
mulas must be constantly repeated, for "only constant
 repetition will finally succeed in imprinting an idea
 upon the memory of a crowd." Philosophy teaches us
 to feel uncertain about the things that seem to us self
evident Propaganda, on the other hand, teaches us to
 accept as self-evident matters about which it would be
 reasonable to suspend our judgment or to feel doubt.
 The aim of the demagogue is to create social coherence
 under his own leadership. But, as Bertrand Russell
 has pointed out, "systems of dogma without empirical
 foundations, such as scholasticism, Marxism and fas
cism, have the advantage of producing a great deal of
 social coherence among their disciples." The dema
gogic propagandist must therefore be consistently
 dogmatic. All his statements are made without
 qualification. There are no grays in his picture of the
 world; everjrthing is either diabolically black or celes
tially white. In Hitler's words, the propagandist
 should adopt "a systematically one-sided attitude to
wards every problem that has to be dealt with." He
 must never admit that he might be wrong or that
PROPAGANDA UNDBR A DICTATORSHIP
 I
 j
 I
 I
 j
 i
 j
 j
 j
 j
 45
 people with a different point of view might be even
 partially right. Opponents should not be argued with;
 they should be attacked, shouted down, or, if they be
come too much of a nuisance, liquidated. The morally
 squeamish intellectual may be shocked by this kind of
 thing. But the masses are always convinced that
 "right is on the side of the active aggressor."
 Such, then, was Hitler's opinion of humanity in the
 mass. It was a very low opinion. Was it also an incor
rect opinion? The tree is known by its fruits, and a
 theory of human nature which inspired the kind of
 techniques that proved so horribly effective must con
tain at least an element of truth. Virtue and intelli
gence belong to human beings as individuals freely
 associating with other individuals in small groups. So
 do sin and stupidity. But the subhuman mindlessness
 to which the demagogue makes his appeal, the moral
 imbecility on which he relies when he goads his vic^
 tims into action, are characteristic not of men and
 women as individuals, but of men and women in
 masses. Mindlessness and moral idiocy are not charac
teristically human attributes; they are symptoms of
 herd-poisoning. In all the world's higher religions,
 salvation and enlightenment are for individuals. The
 kingdom of heaven is within the mind of a person, not
 within the collective mindlessness of a crowd. Christ
 promised to be present where two or three are gath
ered together. He did not say anything about being
 present where thousands are intoxicating one another
 with herd-poison. Under the Nazis enormous numbers
 of people were compelled to spend an enormous amount
 of time marching in serried ranks from point A to
 point B and back again to point A. "This keeping of
 the whole population on the march seemed to be a
 senseless waste of time and energy. Only much later,"
 adds Hermann Rauschning, "was there revealed in it a
 subtle intention based on a well-judged adjustment of
46
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 ends and means. Marching diverts men's thoughts.
 Marching kills thought. Marching makes an end of
 individuality. Marching is the indispensable magic
 stroke performed in order to accustom the people to a
 mechanical, quasi-ritualistic activity until it becomes
 second nature."
 From his point of view and at the level where he had
 chosen to do his dreadful work, Hitler was perfectly
 correct in his estimate of human nature. To those of
 us who look at men and women as individuals rather
 than as members of crowds, or of regimented collec
tives, he seems hideously wrong. In an age of accelerat
ing over-population, of accelerating over-organization
 and ever more eflBcient means of mass communication,
 how can we preserve the integrity and reassert the
 value of the human individual? This is a question that
 can still be asked and perhaps effectively answered. A
 generation from now it may be too late to find an
 answer and perhaps impossible, in the stifling collec
tive climate of that future time, even to ask the ques
tion.
VI.
 THE ARTS OF SELLING
 m
 The survival of democracy depends on the ability of
 large numbers of people to make realistic choices in
 the light of adequate information. A dictatorship, on
 the other hand, maintains itself by censoring or dis
torting the facts, and by appealing, not to reason, not
 to enlightened self-interest, but to passion and prej
udice, to the powerful "hidden forces," as Hitler called
 them, present in the unconscious depths of every hu
man mind.
 In the West, democratic principles are proclaimed
 and many able and conscientious publicists do their
 best to supply electors with adequate information and
 to persuade them, by rational argument, to make realis
Jekyll
 —^a
 tic choices in the light of that information. All this is
 greatly to the good. But unfortunately propaganda in
 the Western democracies, above all in America, has
 two faces and a divided personality. In charge of the
 editorial department there is often a democratic Dr.
 propagandist who would be very happy to
 prove that John Dewey had been right about the abil
ity of human nature to respond to truth and reason.
 But this worthy man controls only a part of the machin
ery of mass conamunication. In charge of advertising
 47
48
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 we find an anti-democratic, because anti-rational, Mr.
 Hyde—ox rather a Dr. Hyde, for Hyde is now a Ph.D.
 in psychology and has a master's degree as well in the
 social sciences. This Dr. Hyde would be very unhappy
 indeed if everybody always lived up to John Dewey's
 faith in human nature. Truth and reason are Jekyll's
 affair, not his. Hyde is a motivation analyst, and his
 business is to study human weaknesses and failings,
 to investigate those unconscious desires and fears by
 which so much of men's conscious thinking and overt
 doing is determined. And he does this, not in the spirit
 of the moralist who would like to make people better,
 or of the physician who would like to improve their
 health, but simply in order to find out the best way to
 take advantage of their ignorance and to expolit their
 irrationality for the pecuniary benefit of his em
ployers. But after all, it may be argued, "capitalism
 is dead, consumerism is king"
 —and consumerism re
quires the services of expert salesmen versed in all the
 arts (including the more insidious arts) of persuasion.
 Under a free enterprise system conmiercial propa
ganda by any and every means is absolutely indis
pensable. But the indispensable is not necessarily the
 desirable. What is demonstrably good in the sphere of
 economics may be far from good for men and women
 as voters or even as human beings. An earlier, more
 moralistic generation would have been profoundly
 shocked by the bland C5aiicism of the motivation ana
lysts. Today we read a book like Mr. Vance Packard's
 The Hidden Persuaders, and are more amused than
 horrified, more resigned than indignant. Given Freud,
 given Behaviorism, given the mass producer's chroni
cally desperate need for mass consumption, this is the
 sort of thing that is only to be expected. But what, we
 may ask, is the sort of thing that is to be expected in
 the future? Are Hyde's activities compatible in the
 long run vdth Jekyll's? Can a campaign in favor of
THE ARTS OF SELLING
 49
 rationality be successful in the teeth of another and
 even more vigorous campaign in favor of irra
tionality? These are questions which, for the mo
ment, I shall not attempt to answer, but shall leave
 hanging, so to speak, as a backdrop to our discussion
 of the methods of mass persuasion in a technologically
 advanced democratic society.
 The task of the commercial propagandist in a democ
racy is in some ways easier and in some ways more
 diflScult than that of a political propagandist employed
 by an established dictator or a dictator in the making.
 It is easier inasmuch as almost everyone starts out
 with a prejudice in favor of beer, cigarettes and ice
boxes, whereas almost nobody starts out with a prej
udice in favor of tyrants. It is more diflScult inasmuch
 as the commercial propagandist is not permitted, by
 the rules of his particular game, to appeal to the more
 savage instincts of his public. The advertiser of dairy
 products would dearly love to tell his readers and lis
teners that all their troubles are caused by the mach
inations of a gang of godless international marga
rine manufacturers, and that it is their patriotic duty
 to march out and burn the oppressors' factories. This
 sort of thing, however, is ruled out, and he must be
 content with a milder approach. But the mild approach
 is less exciting than the approach through verbal or
 phjrsical violence. In the long run, anger and hatred
 are self-defeating emotions. But in the short run they
 pay high dividends in the *form of psychological and
 even (since they release large quantities of adrenalin
 and noradrenalin) physiological satisfaction. People
 may start out with an initial prejudice against
 tyrants; but when tyrants or would-be tyrants treat
 them to adrenalin-releasing propaganda about the
 wickedness of their enemies
 —particularly of enemies
 weak enough to be persecuted
 —they are ready to fol
low him with enthusiasm. In his speeches Hitler kept
50
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 repeating such words as "hatred," "force," "ruthless/*
 "crush," "smash" ; 
and he would accompany these vio
lent words with even more violent gestures. He would
 yell, he would scream, his veins would swell, his face
 would turn purple. Strong emotion (as every actor and
 dramatist knows) is in the highest degree contagious.
 Infected by the malignant frenzy of the orator, the
 audience would groan and sob and scream in an orgy
 of uninhibited passion. And these orgies were so en
joyable that most of those who had experienced them
 eagerly came back for more. Almost all of us long for
 peace and freedom; but very few of us have much
 enthusiasm for the thoughts, feelings and actions that
 make for peace and freedom. Conversely almost nobody
 wants war or tyranny; but a great many people find
 an intense pleasure in the thoughts, feelings and ac
tions that make for war and tyranny. These thoughts,
 feelings and actions are too dangerous to be exploited
 for commercial purposes. Accepting this handicap, the
 advertising man must do the best he can with the less
 intoxicating emotions, the quieter forms of irrational
ity.
 Effective rational propaganda becomes possible only
 when there is a clear understanding, on the part of all
 concerned, of the nature of symbols and of their rela
tions to the things and events symbolized. Irrational
 propaganda depends for its effectiveness on a general
 failure to understand the nature of symbols. Simple
minded people tend to equate the symbol with what it
 stands for, to attribute to things and events some of
 the qualities expressed by the words in terms of which
 the propagandist has chosen, for his own purposes, to
 talk about them. Consider a simple example. Most cos
metics are made of lanolin, which is a mixture of
 purified wool fat and water beaten up into an
 emulsion. This emulsion has many valuable properties:
 it penetrates the skin, it does not become rancid, it is
THE ARTS OF SELLING
 51
 mildly antiseptic and so forth. But the commercial prop
agandists do not speak about the genuine virtues of
 the emulsion. They give it some picturesquely volup
tuous name, talk ecstatically and misleadingly about
 feminine beauty and show pictures of gorgeous
 blondes nourishing their tissues with skin food. "The
 cosmetic manufacturers," one of their number has
 written, "are not selling lanolin, they are selling
 hope.*' For this hope, this fraudulent implication of a
 promise that they will be transfigured, women will pay
 ten or twenty times the value of the emulsion which
 the propagandists have so skilfully related, by means
 of misleading symbols, to a deep-seated and almost
 universal feminine wish
 —the wish to be more attrac
tive to members of the opposite sex. The principles
 underlying this kind of propaganda are extremely sim
ple. Find some common desire, some widespread uncon
scious fear or anxiety; think out some way to relate
 this wish or fear to the product you have to sell; 
then
 build a bridge of verbal or pictorial symbols over
 which your customer can pass from fact to compensa
tory dream, and from the dream to the illusion that
 your product, when purchased, will make the dream
 come true. "We no longer buy oranges, we buy vitality.
 We do not buy just an auto, we buy prestige." And so
 with all the rest. In toothpaste, for example, we buy,
 not a mere cleanser and antiseptic, but release from
 the fear of being sexually repulsive. In vodka and
 whisky we are not buying a protoplasmic poison which
 in small doses, may depress the nervous system in a
 psychologically valuable way; we are buying friendli
ness and good fellowship, the warmth of Dingley Dell
 and the brilliance of the Mermaid Tavern. With our
 laxatives we buy the health of a Greek god, the radi
ance of one of Diana's njmiphs. With the monthly best
 seller we acquire culture, the envy of our less literate
 neighbors and the respect of the sophisticated. In
—
 52
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 every case the motivation analyst has found some
 deep-seated wish or fear, whose energy can be used to
 move the consumer to part with cash and so,
 indirectly, to turn the wheels of industry. Stored in
 the minds and bodies of countless individuals, this po
tential energy is released by, and transmitted along, a
 line of symbols carefully laid out so as to bypass ra
tionality and obscure the real issue.
 Sometimes the symbols take effect by being dispro
portionately impressive, haunting and fascinating in
 their own right. Of this kind are the rites and pomps
 of religion. These "beauties of holiness" strengthen
 faith where it already exists and, where there is no
 faith, contribute to conversion. Appealing, as they do,
 only to the aesthetic sense, they guarantee neither the
 truth nor the ethical value of the doctrines with which
 they have been, quite arbitrarily, associated. As a mat
ter of plain historical fact, the beauties of holiness
 have often been matched and indeed surpassed by the
 beauties of unholiness. Under Hitler, for example, the
 yearly Nuremberg rallies were masterpieces of ritual
 and theatrical art. "I had spent six years in St. Pe
tersburg before the war in the best days of the old
 Russian ballet," writes Sir Nevile Henderson, the Brit
ish ambassador to Hitler's Germany, "but for gran
diose beauty I have never seen any ballet to compare
 with the Nuremberg rally." One thinks of Keats
 "beauty is truth, truth beauty." Alas, the identity ex
ists only on some ultimate, supramundane level. On
 the levels of politics and theology, beauty is perfectly
 compatible with nonsense and tyranny. Which is very
 fortunate; for if beauty were incompatible with Ben
sense and tyranny, there would be precious little art in
 the world. The masterpieces of painting, sculpture and
 architecture were produced as religious or political
 propaganda, for the greater glory of a god, a govern
ment or a priesthood. But most kings and priests have
THE ARTS OF SEUING
 53
 been despotic and all religions have been riddled with
 superstition. Genius has been the servant of tyranny
 and art has advertised the merits of the local cult. Time,
 as it passes, separates the good art from the bad meta
physics. Can we learn to make this separation, not after
 the event, but while it is actually taking place? That is
 the Question.
 In commercial propaganda the principle of the
 disproportionately fascinating symbol is clearly under
stood. Every propagandist has his Art Department,
 and attempts are constantly being made to beautify
 the billboards with striking posters, the advertising
 pages of magazines with lively drawings and photo
graphs. There are no masterpieces; for masterpieces
 appeal only to a limited audience, and the commercial
 propagandist is out to captivate the majority. For him,
 the ideal is a moderate excellence. Those who like this
 not too good, but sulBciently striking, art may be ex
pected to like the products with which it has been
 associated and for which it symbolically stands.
 Another disproportionately fascinating sjrmbol is
 the Singing Commercial. Singing Commercials are a
 recent invention ; 
but the Singing Theological and the
 Singing Devotional
 —^the hymn and the psalm—are as
 old as religion itself. Singing Militaries, or marching
 songs, are coeval with war, and Singing Patriotics, the
 precursors of our national anthems, were doubtless
 used to promote group solidarity, to emphasize the dis
tinction between "us" and "them," by the wandering
 bands of paleolithic hunters and food gatherers. To
 most people music is intrinsically attractive. Moreover,
 melodies tend to ingrain themselves in the listener's
 mind. A tune will haunt the memory during the whole
 of a lifetime. Here, for example, is a quite uninterest
ing statement or value judgment. As it stands nobody
 will pay attention to it. But now set the words to a
 catchy and easily remembered tune. Immediately they
54
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 become words of power. Moreover, the words will tend
 automatically to repeat themselves every time the mel
ody is heard or spontaneously remembered. Orpheus
 has entered into an alliance with Pavlov
 —the power of
 sound with the conditioned reflex. For the commercial
 propagrandist, as for his colleagues in the fields of poli
tics and religion, music possesses yet another advan
tage. Nonsense which it would be shameful for a rea
sonable being to write, speak or hear spoken can be
 sung or listened to by that same rational being with
 pleasure and even with a kind of intellectual convic
tion. Can we learn to separate the pleasure of singing
 or of listening to song from the all too human tend
ency to believe in the propaganda which the song is
 putting over? That again is the question.
 Thanks to compulsory education and the rotary
 press, the propagandist has been able, for many years
 past, to convey his messages to virtually every adult in
 every civilized country. Today, thanks to radio and
 television, he is in the happy position of being able to
 communicate even with unschooled adults and not yet
 literate children.
 Children, as might be expected, are highly suscepti
ble to propaganda. They are ignorant of the world and
 its ways, and therefore completely unsuspecting. Their
 critical faculties are undeveloped. The youngest of
 them have not yet reached the age of reason and the
 older ones lack the exi)erience on which their new
found rationality can effectively work. In Europe, con
scripts used to be playfully referred to as "cannon
 fodder." Their little brothers and sisters have now be
come radio fodder and television fodder. In my child
hood we were taught to sing nursery rhjmies and, in
 pious households, hymns. Today the little ones warble
 the Singing Commercials. Which is better
 —"Rhein
gold is my beer, the dry beer," or "Hey diddle-diddle,
 the cat and the fiddle"? "Abide with me" or "You'll
THE ARTS OF SELLING
 55
 wonder where the yellow went, when you brush your
 teeth with Pepsodent"? Who knows?
 "I don't say that children should be forced to harass
 their parents into bujring products they've seen adver
tised on television, but at the same time I cannot close
 my eyes to the fact that it's being done every day." So
 writes the star of one of the many programs beamed
 to a juvenile audience. "Children," he adds, "are
 living, talking records of what we tell them every
 day." And in due course these living, talking records
 of television commercials will grow up, earn money
 and buy the products of industry. "Think," writes Mr.
 Clyde Miller ecstatically, "think of what it can mean
 to your firm in profits if you can condition a million or
 ten million children, who will grow up into adults
 trained to buy your product, as soldiers are trained in
 advance when they hear the trigger words. Forward
 March!" Yes, just think of it! And at the same time
 remember that the dictators and the would-be dicta
tors have been thinking about this sort of thing for
 years, and that millions, tens of millions, hundreds of
 millions of children are in process of growing up to
 buy the local despot's ideological product and, like
 well-trained soldiers, to respond with appropriate be
havior to the trigger words implanted in those young
 minds by the despot's propagandists.
 Self-government is in inverse ratio to numbers. The
 larger the constituency, the less the value of any par
ticular vote. When he is merely one of millions, the
 individual elector feels himself to be impotent, a neg
ligible quantity. The candidates he has voted into
 oflSce are far away, at the top of the pyramid of power.
 Theoretically they are the servants of the people; but
 in fact it is the servants who give orders and the peo
ple, far oflf at the base of the great pyramid, who must
 obey. Increasing population and advancing technology
 have resulted in an increase in the number and com
56
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 plexity of organizations, an increase in the amount of
 power concentrated in the hands of officials and a corre
sponding decrease in the amount of control exercised
 by electors, coupled with a decrease in the public's
 regard for democratic procedures. Already weakened
 by the vast impersonal forces at work in the modem
 world, democratic institutions are now being under
mined from within by the politicians and their propa
gandists.
 Human beings act in a great variety of irrational
 ways, but all of them seem to be capable, if given a
 fair chance, of making a reasonable choice in the light
 of available evidence. Democratic institutions can be
 made to work only if all concerned do their best to
 impart knowledge and to encourage rationality. But
 today, in the world's most powerful democracy, the
 politicians and their propagandists prefer to make non
sense of democratic procedures by appealing almost
 . . .
 exclusively to the ignorance and irrationality of the
 electors. "Both parties," we were told in 1956 by the
 editor of a leading business journal, "will merchandize
 their candidates and issues by the same methods that
 business has developed to sell goods. These include
 scientific selection of appeals and planned repetition.
 Radio spot announcements and ads will repeat
 phrases with a planned intensity. Billboards will push
 slogans of proven power. . . . 
Candidates need, in
 addition to rich voices and good diction, to be able to
 look 'sincerely' at the TV camera."
 The political merchandisers appeal only to the weak
nesses of voters, never to their potential strength.
 They make no attempt to educate the masses into be
coming fit for self-government; they are content
 merely to manipulate and exploit them. For this pur
pose all the resources of psychology and the social
 sciences are mobilized and set to work. CarefuUy se
lected samples of the electorate are given "interviews
we ARTS OF SELLING
 57
 in depth/' These interviews in depth reveal the uncon
scious fears and wishes most prevalent in a given so
ciety at the time of an election. Phrases and images
 aimed at allaying or, if necessary, enhancing these
 fears, at satisfying these wishes, at least symbolically,
 are then chosen by the experts, tried out on readers
 and audiences, changed or improved in the light of the
 information thus obtained. After which the political
 campaign is ready for the mass communicators. All
 that is now needed is money and a candidate who can
 be coached to look "sincere." Under the new dispen
sation, political principles and plans for specific action
 have come to lose most of their importance. The person
ality of the candidate and the way he is projected by
 the advertising experts are the things that really mat
ter.
 In one way or another, as vigorous he-man or kindly
 father, the candidate must be glamorous. He must also
 be an entertainer who never bores his audience. Inured
 to television and radio, that audience is accustomed to
 being distracted and does not like to be asked to con
centrate or make a prolonged intellectual effort. All
 speeches by the entertainer-candidate must therefore
 be short and snappy. The great issues of the day must
 be dealt with in five minutes at the most—-and prefera
bly (since the audience will be eager to pass on to
 something a little livelier than inflation or the H
bomb) in sixty seconds flat. The nature of oratory is
 such that there has always been a tendency among
 politicians and clergymen to over-simplify complex is
sues. From a pulpit or a platform even the most con
scientious of speakers finds it very difiicult to tell the
 whole truth. The methods now being used to merchan
dise the political candidate as though he were a deo
dorant positively guarantee the electorate against ever
 hearing the truth about anything.
VII.
 BRAINWASHING
 m
 In the two preceding chapters I have described the
 techniques of what may be called wholesale mind-ma
nipulation, as practiced by the greatest demagogue and
 the most successful salesmen in recorded history. But
 no human problem can be solved by wholesale methods
 alone. The shotgun has its place, but so has the hjnpo
dermic syringe. In the chapters that follow I shall
 describe some of the more elffective techniques for ma
nipulating not crowds, not entire publics, but isolated
 individuals.
 In the course of his epoch-making experiments on
 the conditioned reflex, Ivan Pavlov observed that,
 when subjected to prolonged physical or psychic
 stress, laboratory animals exhibit all the symptoms of
 a nervous breakdown. Refusing to cope any longer
 with the intolerable situation, their brains go on
 strike, so to speak, and either stop working altogether
 (the dog loses consciousness), or else resort to slow
downs and sabotage (the dog behaves unrealistically,
 or develops the kind of physical sjnnptoms which, in a
 human being, we would call hysterical). Some animals
 are more resistant to stress than others. Dogs possess
ing what Pavlov called a "strong excitatory" constitu
53
BRAINWASHING
 59
 tion break down much more quickly than dogs of a
 merely "lively" (as opposed to a choleric or agitated)
 temperament. Similarly "weak inhibitory" dogs reach
 the end of their tether much sooner than do "calm
 imperturbable" dogs. But even the most stoical dog is
 unable to resist indefinitely. If the stress to which he
 is subjected is suflSciently intense or sufficiently pro
longed, he will end by breaking down as abjectly and
 as completely as the weakest of his kind.
 Pavlov's findings were confirmed in the most dis
tressing manner, and on a very large scale, during the
 two World Wars. As the result of a single catastrophic
 experience, or of a succession of terrors less appalling
 but frequently repeated, soldiers develop a number of
 disabling psychophysical symptoms. Temporary uncon
sciousness, extreme agitation, lethargy, functional
 blindness or paralysis, completely unrealistic responses
 to the challenge of events, strange reversals of lifelong
 patterns of behavior
 —^all the symptoms, which Pavlov
 observed in his dogs, reappeared among the victims of
 what in the First World War was called "shell shock,"
 in the Second, "battle fatigue." Every man, like every
 dog, has his own individual limit of endurance. Most
 men reach their limit after about thirty day^ of more
 or less continuous stress under the conditions of mod
em combat. The more than averagely susceptible suc
cumb in only fifteen days. The more than averagely
 tough can resist for forty-five or even fifty days.
 Strong or weak, in the long run all of them break
 down. All, that is to say, of those who are initially
 sane. For, ironically enough, the only people who can
 hold up indefinitely under the stress of modem war
 are psychotics. Individual insanity is immime to the
 consequences of collective insanity.
 The fact that every individual has his breaking
 point has been known and, in a crude unscientific way,
 exploited from time immemorial. In some cases man's
60
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 dreadful inhumanity to man has been inspired by the
 love of cruelty for its own horrible and fascinating
 sake. More often, however, pure sadism was tempered
 by utilitarianism, theology or reasons of state. Physi
cal torture and other forms of stress were inflicted by
 witnesses ;
 lawyers in order to loosen the tongues of reluctant
 by clergsonen in order to punish the unor
thodox and induce them to change their opinions; by
 the secret police to extract confessions from persons
 suspected of being hostile to the government. Under
 Hitler, torture, followed by mass extermination, was
 used on those biological heretics, the Jews. For a
 young Nazi, a tour of duty in the Extermination
 Camps was (in Himmler's words) "the best indoctrina
tion on inferior beings and the subhuman races.*'
 Given the obsessional quality of the anti-Semitism
 which Hitler had picked up as a young man in the
 slums of Vienna, this revival of the methods employed
 by the Holy Office against heretics and witches was
 inevitable. But in the light of the findings of Pavlov
 and of the knowledge gained by psychiatrists in the
 treatment of war neuroses, it seems a hideous and
 grotesque anachronism. Stresses amply sufficient to
 cause a complete cerebral breakdown can be induced
 by methods which, though hatefully inhuman, fall
 short of physical torture.
 Whatever may have happened in earlier years, it
 seems fairly certain that torture is not extensively
 used by the Communist police today. They draw their
 inspiration, not from the Inquisitor or the SS man,
 but from the physiologist and his methodically condi
tioned laboratory animals. For the dictator and his
 policemen, Pavlov's findings have important practical
 implications. If the central nervous system of dogs can
 be broken down, so can the central nervous system of
 political prisoners. It is simply a matter of applying
 the right amount of stress for the right length of
BRAINWASHING
 ^^
 time. At the end of the treatment, the prisoner will be
 in a state of neurosis or hysteria, and will be ready to
 confess whatever his captors want him to confess.
 But confession is not enough. A hopeless neurotic is
 no use to anyone. What the intelligent and practical
 dictator needs is not a patient to be institutionalized,
 or a victim to be shot, but a convert who will work for
 the Cause. Turning once again to Pavlov, he learns
 that, on their way to the point of final breakdown,
 dogs become more than normally suggestible. New be
havior patterns can easily be installed while the dog is
 at or near the limit of its cerebral endurance, and
 these new behavior patterns seem to be ineradicable.
 The animal in which they have been implanted cannot
 be deconditioned; that which it has learned under
 stress will remain an integral part of its make-up.
 Psychological stresses can be produced in many
 ways. Dogs become disturbed when stimuli are unu
sually strong; when the interval between a stimulus
 and the customary response is unduly prolonged and
 the animal is left in a state of suspense; when the
 brain is confused by stimuli that run counter to what
 the dog has learned to expect; when stimuli make no
 sense within the victim's established frame of ref
erence. Furthermore, it has been found that the de
liberate induction of fear, rage or anxiety markedly
 heightens the dog's suggestibility. If these emotions
 are kept at a high pitch of intensity for a long enough
 time, the brain goes "on strike." When this happens,
 new behavior patterns may be installed with the great
est of ease.
 Among the physical stresses that increase a dog's
 suggestibility are fatigue, wotmds and every form of
 sickness.
 For the would-be dictator these findings possess
 important practical implications. They prove, for
 example, that Hitler was quite right in maintaining
62
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 that mass meetings at night were more effective than
 mass meetings in the daytime. During the day, he
 wrote, "man's will power revolts with highest energy
 against any attempt at being forced under another's
 will and another's opinion. In the evening, however,
 they succumb more easily to the dominating force of a
 stronger will."
 Pavlov would have agreed with him; fatigue in
creases suggestibility. (That is why, among other rea
sons, the commercial sponsors of television programs
 prefer the evening hours and are ready to back their
 preference with hard cash.)
 Illness is even more effective than fatigue as an in
tensifier of suggestibility. In the past, sickrooms were
 the scene of countless religious conversions. The
 scientifically trained dictator of the future will have
 all the hospitals in his dominions wired for sound and
 equipped with pillow speakers. Canned persuasion will
 be on the air twenty-four hours a day, and the more
 important patients will be visited by political soul
savers and mind-changers just as, in the past, their
 ancestors were visited by priests, nuns and pious lay
men.
 The fact that strong negative emotions tend to
 heighten suggestibility and so facilitate a change of
 heart had been observed and exploited long before the
 days of Pavlov. As Dr. William Sargant has pointed
 out in his enlightening book. Battle for the Mind,
 John Wesley's enormous success as a preacher was
 based upon an intuitive understanding of the central
 nervous system. He would open his sermon with a long
 and detailed description of the torments to which, un
less they underwent conversion, his hearers would un
doubtedly be condemned for all eternity. Then, when
 terror and an agonizing sense of guilt had brought his
 audience to the verge, or in some cases over the verge,
 af a complete cerebral breakdown, he would change his
—
 BRAINWASHING
 63
 tone and promise salvation to those who believed and
 repented. By this kind of preaching, Wesley converted
 thousands of men, women and children. Intense, pro
longed fear broke them down and produced a state of
 greatly intensified suggestibility. In this state they
 were able to accept the preacher's theological pro
nouncements without question. After which they were
 reintegrated by words of comfort, and emerged from
 their ordeal with new and generally better behavior
 patterns ineradicably implanted in their minds and
 nervous systems.
 The effectiveness of political and religious propa
ganda depends upon the methods employed, not upon
 the doctrines taught. These doctrines may be true or
 false, wholesome or pernicious
 —it makes little or no
 difference. If the indoctrination is given in the right
 way at the proper stage of nervous exhaustion, it will
 work. Under favorable conditions, practically every
body can be converted to practically anything.
 We possess detailed descriptions of the methods
 used by the Ck)mmunist police for dealing with polit
ical jprisoners. From the moment he is taken into cus
tody, the victim is subjected systematically to many
 kinds of physical and psychological stress. He is badly
 fed, he is made extremely uncomfortable, he is not
 allowed to sleep for more than a few hours each night.
 And an the time he is kept in a state of suspense,
 uncertainty and acute apprehension. Day after day
 or rather night after night, for these Pavlovian police
men understand the value of fatigue as an intensifier
 of suggestibility
 —^he is questioned, often for many
 hours at a stretch, by interrogators who do their best
 to frighten, confuse and bewilder him. After a few
 weeks or months of such treatment, his brain goes on
 strike and he confesses whatever it is that his captors
 want him to confess. Then, if he is to be converted
 rather than shot, he is offered the comfort of hope. If
—
 64
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 he will but accept the true faith, he can yet be saved
 not, of course, in the next life (for, oflScially, there is
 no next life) , 
but in this.
 Similar but rather less drastic methods were used
 during the Korean War on military prisoners. In their
 Chinese camps the young Western captives were sys
tematically subjected to stress. Thus, for the most
 trivial breaches of the rules, offenders would be sum
moned to the commandant's ofl5ce, there to be ques
tioned, browbeaten and publicly humiliated. And the
 process would be repeated, again and again, at any
 hour of the day or night. This continuous harassment
 produced in its victims a sense of bewilderment and
 chronic anxiety. To intensify their sense of guilt, pris
oners were made to write and rewrite, in ever more
 intimate detail, long autobiographical accounts of
 their shortcomings. And after having confessed their
 own sins, they were required to confess the sins of
 their companions. The aim was to create within the
 camp a nightmarish society, in which everybody was
 spying on, and informing against, everyone else. To
 these mental stresses were added the physical stresses
 of malnutrition, discomfort and illness. The increased
 suggestibility thus induced was skilfully exploited by
 the Chinese, who poured into these abnormally recep
tive minds large doses of pro-Communist and anti-capi
talist literature. These Pavlovian techniques were re
markably successful. One out of every seven American
 prisoners was guilty, we are officially told, of grave
 collaboration with the Chinese authorities, one out of
 three of technical collaboration.
 It must not be supposed that this kind of treatment
 is reserved by the Communists exclusively for their
 enemies. The young field workers, whose business it
 was, during the first years of the new regime, to act as
 Communist missionaries and organizers in China's in
numerable towns and villages were made to take a
BRAINWASHING
 65
 course of indoctrination far more intense than that to
 which any prisoner of war was ever subjected. In his
 China under Communism R. K Walker describes the
 methods by which the party leaders are able to fabri
cate out of ordinary men and women the thousands of
 selfless fanatics required for spreading the C!ommunist
 gospel and for enforcing Communist policies. Under
 this system of training, the human raw material is
 shipped to special camps, where the trainees are com
pletely isolated from their friends, families and the
 outside world in general. In these camps they are
 made to perform exhausting physical and mental
 work; they are never alone, always in groups; they are
 encouraged to spy on one another; they are required to
 write self-accusatory autobiographies; they live in
 chronic fear of the dreadful fate that may befall them
 on account of what has been said about them by in
formers or of what they themselves have confessed. In
 this state of heightened suggestibility they are given
 an intensive course in theoretical and applied Marxism
 —^a course in which failure to pass examinations may
 mean anything from ignominious expulsion to a term
 in a forced labor camp or even liquidation. After about
 six months of this kind of thing, prolonged mental and
 physical stress produces the results which Pavlov's
 findings would lead one to expect. One after another,
 or in whole groups, the trainees break down. Neurotic
 and hysterical symptoms make their appearance. Some
 of the victims commit suicide, others (as many, we are
 told, as 20 per cent of the total) develop a severe
 mental illness. Those who survive the rigors of the
 conversion process emerge with new and ineradicable
 behavior patterns. All their ties with the past
friends, family, traditional decencies and pieties—have
 been severed. They are new men, re-created in the im
age of their new god and totally dedicated to his serv
ice.
66
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 Throughout the Communist world tens of thousands
 of these disciplined and devoted young men are being
 turned out every year from hundreds of conditioning
 centers. What the Jesuits did for the Roman Church
 of the Counter Reformation, these products of a more
 scientific and even harsher training are now doing,
 and will doubtless continue to do, for the Communist
 parties of Europe, Asia and Africa.
 In politics Pavlov seems to have been an old-fash
ioned liberal. But, by a strange irony of fate, his re
searches and the theories he based upon them have
 called into existence a great army of fanatics dedi
cated heart and soul, reflex and nervous system, to the
 destruction of old-fashioned liberalism, wherever it
 can be found.
 Brainwashing, as it is now practiced, is a hybrid
 technique, depending for its effectiveness partly on the
 systematic use of violence, partly on skilful psychologi
cal manipulation. It represents the tradition of 198^
 on its way to becoming the tradition of Brave New
 World. Under a long-established and well-regulated dic
tatorship our current methods of semiviolent manipula
tion will seem, no doubt, absurdly crude. Conditioned
 from earliest infancy (and perhaps also biologically
 predestined), the average middle- or lower-caste indi
vidual will never require conversion or even a re
fresher course in the true faith. The members of the
 highest caste will have to be able to think new
 thoughts in response to new situations; consequently
 their training will be much less rigid than the train
ing imposed upon those whose business is not to rea
son why, but merely to do and die with the minimum
 of fuss. These upper-caste individuals will be mem
bers, still, of a wild species
 —the trainers and guard
ians, themselves only slightly conditioned, of a breed
 of completely domesticated animals. Their wildness
 will make it possible for them to become heretical and
BRAINWASHING
 67
 rebellious. When this happens, they will have to be
 either liquidated, or brainwashed back into orthodoxy,
 or (as in Brave New World) exiled to some island,
 where they can give no further trouble, except of
 course to one another. But universal infant condition
ing and the other techniques of manipulation and con
trol are still a few generations away in the future. On
 the road to the Brave New World our rulers will have
 to rely on the transitional and provisional techniques
 of brainwashing.
VIII.
 CHEMICAL PERSUASION
 iS
 In the Brave New World of my fable there was no
 whisky, no tobacco, no illicit heroin, no bootlegged co
caine. People neither smoked, nor drank, nor sniffed,
 nor gave themselves injections. Whenever anyone felt
 depressed or below par, he would swallow a tablet or
 two of a chemical compound called soma. The original
 soma, from which I took the name of this hypothetical
 drug, was an unknown plant (possibly Asclepias
 acida) used by the ancient Aryan invaders of India in
 one of the most solemn of their religious rites. The
 intoxicating juice expressed from the stems of this
 plant was drunk by the priests and nobles in the
 course of an elaborate ceremony. In the Vedic hymns
 we are told that the drinkers of soma were blessed in
 many ways. Their bodies were strengthened, their
 hearts were filled with courage, joy and enthusiasm,
 their minds were enlightened and in an immediate ex
perience of eternal life they received the assurance of
 their inmiortality. But the sacred juice had its draw
backs. Soma was a dangerous drug
 —^so dangerous
 that even the great sky-god, Indra, was sometimes
 made ill by drinking it. Ordinary mortals might even
 die of an overdose. But the experience was so transcen
68
CHEMICAL PERSUASION
 69
 dently blissful and enlightening that soma drinking
 was regarded as a high privilege. For this privilege no
 price was too great.
 The soma of Brave New World had none of the draw
backs of its Indian original. In small doses it brought
 a sense of bliss, in larger doses it made you see visions
 and, if you took three tablets, you would sink in a few
 minutes into refreshing sleep. And all at no physiologi
cal or mental cost. The Brave New Worlders could take
 holidays from their black moods, or from the familiar
 annoyances of everyday life, without sacrificing their
 health or permanently reducing their efiiciency.
 In the Brave New World the soma habit was not a
 private vice; it was a political institution, it was the
 very essence of the Life, Liberty and Pursuit of Happi
ness guaranteed by the Bill of Rights. But this most
 precious of the subjects' inalienable privileges was at
 the same time one of the most powerful instruments of
 rule in the dictator's armory. The systematic drugging
 of individuals for the benefit of the State (and inciden
tally, of course, for their own delight) was a main
 plank in the policy of the World Controllers. The daily
 soma ration was an insurance against personal malad
justment, social unrest and the spread of subversive
 ideas. Religion, Karl Marx declared, is the opium of
 the people. In the Brave New World this situation was
 reversed. Opium, or rather soma, was the people's reli
gion. Like religion, the drug had power to console and
 compensate, it called up visions of another, better
 world, it offered hope, strengthened faith and pro
moted charity. Beer, a poet has written,
 . . .
 does more than Milton can
 To justify God's ways to man.
 And let us remember that, compared with soma, beer
 is a drug of the crudest and most unreliable kind. In
 this matter of justifying God's ways to man, soma is
70
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 to alcohol as alcohol is to the theological arguments of
 MiltoiL
 In 1931, when I was writing about the imaginary
 S3nithetic by means of which future generations would
 be made both happy and docile, the well-known Ameri
can biochemist, Dr. Irvine Page, was preparing to
 leave Germany, where he had spent the three preced
ing years at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute, working on
 the chemistry of the brain. "It is hard to understand,"
 Dr. Page has written in a recent article, "why it took
 80 long for scientists to get around to investigating
 the chemical reactions in their own brains. I speak,"
 he adds, "from acute personal experience. When I
 came home in 1931 ... I could not get a job in this
 field (the field of brain chemistry) or stir a ripple of
 interest in it." Today, twenty-seven years later, the
 non-exifltent ripple of 1931 has become a tidal wave of
 biochemical and psychopharmacological research. The
 enzymes which regulate the workings of the brain are
 being studied. Within the body, hitherto unknown
 chemical substances such as adrenochrome and seroto
nin (of which Dr. Page was a co-discoverer) have been
 isolated and their far-reaching effects on our mental
 and physical functions are now being investigated.
 Meanwhile new drugs are being synthesized
 —drugs
 that reinforce or correct or interfere with the actions
 of the various chemicals, by means of which the
 nervous system performs its daily and hourly miracles
 as the controller of the body, the instrument and medi
ator of consciousness. From our present point of view,
 the most interesting fact about these new drugs is
 that they temporarily alter the chemistry of the brain
 and the associated state of the mind without doing
 any permanent damage to the organism as a whole. In
 this respect they are like soma—^and profoundly unlike
 the mind-changing drugs of the past. For example, the
 classical tranquillizer is opium- But opium is a dan
chemk:al persuasion
 71
 gerous drug which, from neolithic times down to the
 present day, has been making addicts and ruining
 health. The same is true of the classical euphoric, alco
hol
 —^the drug which, in the words of the Psalmist,
 "maketh glad the heart of man." But unfortunately
 alcohol not only maketh glad the heart of man; it also,
 in excessive doses, causes illness and addiction, and
 has been a main source, for the last eight or ten thou
sand years, of crime, domestic unhappiness, moral deg
radation and avoidable accidents.
 Among the classical stimulants, tea, coffee and matfi
 are, thank goodness, almost completely harmless. They
 are also very weak stimulants. Unlike these "cups that
 cheer but not inebriate," cocaine is a very powerful
 and a very dangerous drug. Those who make use of it
 must pay for their ecstasies, their sense of unlimited
 physical and mental power, by spells of agonizing
 depression, by such horrible physical symptoms as the
 sensation of being infested by myriads of crawling
 insects and by paranoid delusions that may lead to
 crimes of violence. Another stimulant of more recent
 vintage is amphetamine, better known under its trade
 name of Benzedrine. Amphetamine works very effec
tively
 —but works, if abused, at the expense of mental
 and physical health. It has been reported that, in Ja
pan, there are now about one million amphetamine ad
dicts.
 Of the classical vision-producers the best knovm are
 the peyote of Mexico and the southwestern United
 States and Cannabis saliva, consumed all over the
 world under such names as hashish, bhang, kif and
 marihuana. According to the best medical and anthro
pological evidence, peyote is far less harmful than the
 White Man's gin or whisky. It permits the Indians
 who use it in their religious rites to enter paradise,
 and to feel at one with the beloved community, without
 making them pay for the privilege by anything worse
72
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 than the ordeal of having to chew on something with a
 revolting flavor and of feeling somewhat nauseated for
 an hour or two. Cannabis aativa is a less innocuous
 drug—though not nearly so harmful as the sen
sation-mongers would have us believe. The Medical
 Committee, appointed in 1944 by the Mayor of New
 York to investigate the problem of marihuana, came to
 the conclusion, after careful investigation, that Can
ndbis aativa is not a serious menace to society, or even
 to those who indulge in It It is merely a nuisance.
 From these classical mind-changes we pass to the
 latest products of psychopharmacological research.
 Most highly publicized of these are the three new tran
quillizers, reserpine, chlorpromazine and meprobamate.
 Administered to certain classes of psychotics, the
 first two have proved to be remarkably effective, not in
 curing mental illnesses, but at least in temporarily
 abolishing their more distressing symptoms. Meproba
mate (alias Miltown) produces similar effects in per
sons suffering from various forms of neurosis. None of
 these drugs is perfectly harmless; but their cost, in
 terms of physical health and mental efficiency, is ex
traordinarily low. In a world where nobody gets any
thing for nothing tranquillizers offer a great deal for
 very little. Miltown and chlorpromazine are not yet
 soma; but they come fairly near to being one of the
 aspects of that mythical drug. They provide temporary
 relief from nervous tension without, in the great ma
jority of cases, inflicting permanent organic harm, and
 without causing more than a rather slight im
pairment, while the drug is working, of intellectual
 and physical efficiency. Except as narcotics, they are
 probably to be preferred to the barbiturates, which
 blunt the mind's cutting edge and, in large doses,
 cause a number of undesirable psychophysical symp
toms and may result in a full-blown addiction.
—
 CHEMICAL PERSUASiON
 73
 In LSD-25 (lysergic acid diethylamide) the phar
macologists have recently created another aspect of
 soma—^a 
perception-improver and vision-producer that
 is, physiologically speaking, almost costless. This ex
traordinary drug, which is effective in doses as small
 as fifty or even twenty-five millionths of a gram, has
 power (like peyote) to transport people into the other
world. In the majority of cases, the other world to
 which LSD-25 gives access is heavenly; alternatively
 It may be purgatorial or even infernal. But, positive,
 or negative, the lysergic acid experience is felt by al
most everyone who undergoes it to be profoundly
 significant and enlightening. In any event, the fact
 that minds can be changed so radically at so little cost
 to the body is altogether astonishing.
 Soma was not only a vision-producer and a tranquil
lizer; it was also (and no doubt impossibly) a stimu
lant of mind and body, a creator of active euphoria as
 well as of the negative happiness that follows the re
lease from anxiety and tension.
 The ideal stimulant—^powerful but innocuous
 still awaits discovery. Amphetamine, as we have seen,
 was far from satisfactory; it exacted too high a price
 for what it gave. A more promising candidate for the
 role of soma in its third aspect is Iproniazid, which is
 now being used to lift depressed patients out of their
 misery, to enliven the apathetic and in general to in
crease the amount of available psychic energy. Still
 more promising, according to a distinguished phar
macologist of my acquaintance, is a new compound,
 still in the testing stage, to be known as Deaner.
 Deaner is an amino-alcohol and is thought to increase
 the production of acetyl-choline within the body, and
 thereby to increase the activity and effectiveness of
 the nervous system. The man who takes the new pill
 needs less sleep, feels more alert and cheerful, thinks
—
 74
 faster and better
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 —^and all at next to no organic cost,
 at any rate in the short run. It sounds almost too good
 to be true.
 We see then that, though soma does not yet exist
 (and will probably never exist), fairly good substi
tutes for the various aspects of soma have already
 been discovered. There are now physiologically cheap
 tranquillizers, physiologically cheap vision-producers
 and physiologically cheap stimulants.
 That a dictator could, if he so desired, make use of
 these drugs for political purposes is obvious. He could
 ensure himself against political unrest by changing
 the chemistry of his subjects' brains and so making
 them content with their servile condition. He could use
 tranquillizers to calm the excited, stimulants to arouse
 enthusiasm in the indifferent, halluciants to distract
 the attention of the wretched from their miseries. But
 how, it may be asked, will the dictator get his subjects
 to take the pills that will make them think, feel and
 behave in the ways he finds desirable? In all probabil
ity it will be enough merely to make the pills available.
 Today alcohol and tobacco are available, and people
 spend considerably more on these very unsatisfactory
 euphorics, pseudo-stimulants and sedatives than they
 are ready to spend on the education of their children.
 Or consider the barbiturates and the tranquillizers. In
 the United States these drugs can be obtained only on
 a doctor's prescription. But the demand of the Ameri
can public for something that will make life in an
 urban-industrial environment a little more tolerable is
 so great that doctors are now writing prescriptions for
 the various tranquillizers at the rate of forty-eight
 millions a year. Moreover, a majority of these prescrip
tions are refilled. A hundred doses of happiness are not
 enough: send to the drugstore for another bottle
 and, when that is finished, for another. . . . 
There
 can be no doubt that, if tranquillizers could be bought
OiEMICAL PERSUASiON
 75
 as easily and cheaply as aspirin, they would be con
sumed, not by the billions, as they are at present, but
 by the scores and hundreds of billions. And a good,
 cheap stimulant would be almost as popular.
 Under a dictatorship pharmacists would be in
structed to change their tune with every change of
 circumstances. In times of national crisis it would be
 their business to push the sale of stimulants. Between
 crises, too much alertness and energy on the part of
 his subjects might prove embarrassing to the tyrant.
 At such times the masses would be urged to buy tran
quillizers and vision-producers. Under the influence of
 tiiese soothing syrups they could be relied upon to give
 their master no trouble.
 As things now stand, the tranquillizers may prevent
 some people from giving enough trouble, not only to
 their rulers, but even to themselves. Too much tension
 is a disease; but so is too little. There are certain
 occasions when we ought to be tense, when an excess
 of tranquillity (and especially of tranquillity imposed
 from the outside, by a chemical) is entirely inappropri
ate.
 At a recent symposium on meprobamate, in which I
 was a participant, an eminent biochemist playfully
 suggested that the United States government should
 make a free gift to the Soviet people of fifty billion
 doses of this most popular of the tranquillizers. The
 joke had a serious point to it. In a contest between two
 populations, one of which is being constantly stimu
lated by threats and promises, constantly directed by
 one^ointed propaganda, while the other is no less con
stantly being distracted by television and tranquillized
 by Miltown, which of the opponents is more likely to
 come out on top?
 As well as tranquillizing, hallucinating and stimulate
 ing, the soma of my fable had the power of heighten
ing suggestibility, and so could be used to reinforce
76
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 the effects of governmental propaganda. Less effectively
 and at a higher physiological cost, several drugs al
ready in the pharmacopoeia can be used for the same
 purpose. There is scopolamine, for example, the active
 principle of henbane and, in large doses, a powerful
 poison; there are pentothal and sodium amytal. Nick
named for some odd reason "the truth serum," pento
thal has been used by the police of various countries
 for the purpose of extracting confessions from (or per
haps suggesting confessions to) reluctant criminals,
 Pentothal and sodium amytal lower the barrier be
tween the conscious and the subconscious mind and
 are of great value in the treatment of "battle fatigue"
 by the process known in England as "abreaction ther
apy," in America as "narcosynthesis." It is said that
 these drugs are sometimes employed by the Conmiu
nists, when preparing important prisoners for their
 public appearance in court.
 Meanwhile pharmacology, biochemistry and neurol
ogy are on the march, and we can be quite certain
 that, in the course of the next few years, new and
 better chemical methods for increasing suggestibility
 and lowering psychological resistance will be dis
covered. Like everything else, these discoveries may be
 used well or badly. They may help the psychiatrist in
 his battle against mental illness, or they may help the
 dictator in his battle against freedom. More probably
 (since science is divinely impartial) they will both en
slave and make free, heal and at the same time
 destroy.
IX.
 SUBCONSCIOUS PERSUASION
 m
 In a footnote appended to the 1919 edition of his book,
 The Interpretation of Dreams, Sigmund Freud called
 attention to the work of Dr. Poetzl, an Austrian neu
rologist, who had recently published a paper de
scribing his experiments with the tachistoscope, (The
 tachistoscope is an instrument that comes in two
 forms
 —^a 
viewing box, into which the subject looks at
 an image that is exposed for a small fraction of a
 second; a magic lantern with a high-speed shutter,
 capable of projecting an image very briefly upon a
 screen.) In these experiments "Poetzl required the sub
jects to make a drawing of what they had consciously
 noted of a picture exposed to their view in a tachisto
scope. ... He then turned his attention to the dreams
 dreamed by the subjects during the following night
 and required them once more to make drawings of
 appropriate portions of these dreams. It was shown
 unmistakably that those details of the exposed picture
 which had not been noted by the subject provided ma
terial for the construction of the dream."
 With various modifications and refinements Poetzl's
 experiments have been repeated several times, most
 recently by Dr. Charles Fisher, who has contributed
 77
78
 B4UVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 three excellent papers on the subject of dreams and
 "preconscious perception" to the Journal of the Ameri'
 can Psychoanalytic Association. Meanwhile the aca
demic psychologists have not been idle. Confirming
 Poetzl's findings, their studies have shown that people
 actually see and hear a great deal more than they con
sciously know they see and hear, and that what they
 see and hear without knowing it is recorded by the
 subconscious mind and may aflfect their conscious
 thoughts, feelings and behavior.
 Pure science does not remain pure indefinitely.
 Sooner or later it is apt to turn into applied science
 and finally into technology. Theory modulates into in
dustrial practice, knowledge becomes power, formulas
 and laboratory experiments undergo a metamorphosis,
 and emerge as the H-bomb. In the present case,
 Poetzl's nice little piece of pure science, and all the
 other nice little pieces of pure science in the field of
 preconscious perception, retained their pristine purity
 for a surprisingly long time. Then, in the early au
tumn of 1957, exactly forty years after the publication
 of Poetzl's original paper, it was announced that their
 purity was a thing of the past; they had been applied,
 they had entered the realm of technology. The an
nouncement made a considerable stir, and was talked
 and written about all over the civilized world. And no
 wonder; for the new technique of "subliminal projec
tion," as it was called, was intimately associated with
 mass entertainment, and in the life of civilized human
 beings mass entertainment now plays a part compara
ble to that played in the Middle Ages by religion. Our
 epoch has been given many nicknames
 —the Age of
 Anxiety, the Atomic Age, the Space Age. It might,
 with equally good reason, be called the Age of Televi
sion Addiction, the Age of Soap Opera, the Age of the
 Disk Jockey. In such an age the announcement that
 Poetzl's pure science had been applied in the form of a
SUBCONSaOUS f^ERSUAStOhf
 79
 technique of subliminal projection could not fail to
 arouse the most intense interest among the world's
 mass entertainees. For the new technique was aimed
 directly at them, and its purpose was to manipulate
 their minds without their being aware of what was
 being done to them. By means of specially designed
 tachistoscopes words or images were to be flashed for
 a millisecond or less upon the screens of television sets
 and motion picture theaters during (not before or
 after) the program. "Drink Coca-Cola" or "Light up a
 Camel" would be superimposed upon the lovers' em
brace, the tears of the broken-hearted mother, and the
 optic nerves of the viewers would record these secret
 messages, their subconscious minds would respond to
 them and in due course they would consciously feel a
 craving for soda pop and tobacco. And meanwhile
 other secret messages would be whispered too softly,
 or squeaked too shrilly, for conscious hearing. Con
sciously the listener might be paying attention to some
 phrase as "Darling, I love you"; 
but subliminally, be
neath the threshold of awareness, his incredibly sensi
tive ears and his subconscious mind would be taking
 in the latest good news about deodorants and
 laxatives.
 Does this kind of commercial propaganda really
 work? The evidence produced by the commercial firm
 that first unveiled a technique for subliminal pro
jection was vague and, from a scientific point of
 view, very unsatisfactory. Repeated at regular inter
vals during the showing of a picture in a movie
 theater, the command to buy more popcorn was said to
 have resulted in a 50 per cent increase in popcorn sales
 during the intermission. But a single experiment
 proves very little. Moreover, this particular experiment
 was poorly set up. There were no controls and no at
tempt was made to allow for the many variables that
 undoubtedly affect the consumption of popcorn by a
80
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 theater audience. And anyhow was this the most eiFec
tive way of applying the knowledge accumulated over
 the years by the scientific investigators of subcon
scious perception? Was it intrinsically probable that,
 by merely flashing the name of a product and a com
mand to buy it, you would be able to break down sales
 resistance and recruit new customers? The answer to
 both these questions is pretty obviously in the nega
tive. But this does not mean, of course, that the
 findings of the neurologists and psychologists are with
out any practical importance. Skilfully applied,
 Poetzl's nice little piece of pure science might well
 become a powerful instrument for the manipulation of
 unsuspecting minds.
 For a few suggestive hints let us now turn from the
 popcorn vendors to those who, with less noise but more
 imagination and better methods, have been experiment
ing in the same field. In Britain, where the process of
 manipulating minds below the level of consciousness is
 known as "strobonic injection," investigators have
 stressed the practical importance of creating the right
 psychological conditions for subconscious persuasion.
 A suggestion above the threshold of awareness is more
 likely to take effect when the recipient is in a light
 hypnotic trance, under the influence of certain drugs,
 or has been debilitated by illness, starvation, or any
 kind of physical or emotional stress. But what is true
 for suggestions above the threshold of consciousness is
 also true for suggestions beneath that threshold. In a
 word, the lower the level of a person's psychological
 resistance, the greater will be the effectiveness of stro
bonically injected suggestions. The scientific dictator
 of tomorrow will set up his whispering machines and
 subliminal projectors in schools and hospitals (chil
dren and the sick are highly suggestible), and in all
 public places where audiences can be given a prelimi
SUBCONSCIOUS PERSUASION
 81
 nary softening up by suggestibility-increasing oratory
 or rituals.
 From the conditions under which we may expect
 subliminal suggestion to be effective we now pass to
 the suggestions themselves. In what terms should the
 propagandist address himself to his victims' subcon
scious minds? Direct commands ("Buy popcorn" or
 "Vote for Jones") and unqualified statements ("Social
ism stinks" or "X's toothpaste cures halitosis") are
 likely to take eifect only upon those minds that are
 already partial to Jones and popcorn, already alive to
 the dangers of body odors and the public ownership of
 the means of production. But to strengthen existing
 faith is not enough; the propagandist, if he is worth
 his salt, must create new faith, must know how to
 bring the indifferent and the undecided over to his
 side, must be able to mollify and perhaps even convert
 the hostile. To subliminal assertion and command he
 knows that he must add subliminal persuasion.
 Above the threshold of awareness, one of the most
 effective methods of non-rational persuasion is what
 may be called persuitsion-by-association. The propagan
dist arbitrarily associates his chosen product, candi
date or cause with some idea, some image of a person
 or thing which most people, in a given culture, unques
tioningly regard as good. Thus, in a selling campaign
 female beauty may be arbitrarily associated with any
thing from a bulldozer to a diuretic; in a political
 campaign patriotism may be associated with any cause
 from apartheid to integration, and with any kind of
 person, from a Mahatma Gandhi to a Senator McCar
thy. Years ago, in Central America, I observed an
 example of persuasion-by-association which fiilled 
me
 with an appalled admiration for the men who had de
vised it. In the mountains of Guatemala the only im
ported art works are the colored calendars distributed
82
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 free of charge by the foreigm companies whose prod
ucts are sold to the Indians. The American calendars
 showed pictures of dogs, of landscapes, of young
 women in a state of partial nudity. But to the Indian
 dogs are merely utilitarian objects, landscapes are
 what he sees only too much of, every day of his life,
 and half-naked blondes are uninteresting, perhaps a
 little repulsive. American calendars were, in conse
quence, far less popular than German calendars; for
 the German advertisers had taken the trouble to find
 out what the Indians valued and were interested in. I
 remember in particular one masterpiece of commercial
 prc^xaganda. It was a calendar put out by a manufac
turer of aspirin. At the bottom of the picture one saw
 the familiar trademark on the familiar bottle of white
 tablets. Above it were no snow scenes or autumnal
 woods, no cocker spaniels or bosomy chorus girls. No
 —^the wily Germans had associated their pain-re
lievers with a brightly colored and extremely lifelike
 picture of the Holy Trinity sitting on a cumulus cloud
 and surrounded by St. Joseph, the Virgin Mary, as
sorted saints and a large number of angels. The mirac
ulous virtues of acetyl salicylic acid were thus guar
anteed, in the Indians' simple and deeply religious
 minds, by God the Father and the entire heavenly
 host.
 This kind of persuasion-by-association is something
 to which the techniques of subliminal projection seem
 to lend themselves particularly well. In a series of ex
periments carried out at New York University, under
 the auspices of the National Institute of Health, it
 was found that a person's feelings about some con
sciously seen image could be modified by associating
 it, on the subconscious level, with another image, or,
 better still, with value-bearing words. Thus, when asso
ciated, on the subconscious level, with the word
 "happy," a blank expressionless face would seem to the
SUBCONSaOUS PERSUASiON
 83
 observer to smile, to look friendly, amiable, outgoingo
 When the same face was associated, also on the subcon
scious level, with the word "angry," it took on a forbid
ding expression, and seemed to the observer to have
 become hostile and disagreeable. (To a group of young
 women, it also came to seem very masculine
 —^whereas
 when it was associated with "happy," they saw the
 face as belonging to a member of their own sex. Fa
thers and husbands, please take note.) For the conmaer
cial and political propagandist, these findings, it is
 obvious, are highly significant. If he can put his vic
tims into a state of abnormally high suggestibility, if
 he can show them, while they are in that state, the
 thing, the person or, through a symbol, the cause he
 has to sell, and if, on the subconscious level, he can
 associate this thing, person or symbol with some
 value-bearing word or image, he may be able to modify
 their feelings and opinions without their having any
 idea of what he is doing. It should be possible, accord
ing to an enterprising commercial group in New Or
leans, to enhance the entertainment value of films and
 television plays by using this technique. People like to
 feel strong emotions and therefore enjoy tragedies,
 thrillers, murder mysteries and tales of passion. The
 dramatization of a fight or an embrace produces
 strong emotions in the spectators. It might produce
 even stronger emotions if it were associated, on the
 subconscious level, with appropriate words or symbols.
 For example, in the film version of A Farewell to
 Arms, the death of the heroine in childbirth might be
 made even more distressing than it already is by sub
liminally flashing upon the screen, again and again,
 during the playing of the scene, such ominous words
 as "pain," "blood" and "death." Consciously, the
 words would not be seen; but their effect upon the
 subconscious mind might be very great and these
 effects might powerfully reinforce the emotions
84
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 evoked, on the conscious level, by the acting and the
 dialogue. If, as seems pretty certain, subliminal projec
tion can consistently intensify the emotions felt by
 moviegoers, the motion picture industry may yet be
 saved from bankruptcy
 —^that is, if the producers of
 television plays don't get there first.
 In the light of what has been said about persuasion
by-association and the enhancement of emotions by
 subliminal suggestion, let us try to imagine what the
 political meeting of tomorrow will be like. The candi
date (if there is still a question of candidates), or the
 appointed representative of the ruling oligarchy, will
 make his speech for all to hear. Meanwhile the tachis
toscopes, the whispering and squeaking machines, the
 projectors of images so dim that only the subconscious
 mind can respond to them, will be reinforcing what he
 says by systematically associating the man and his
 cause with positively charged words and hallowed
 images, and by strobonically injecting negatively
 charged words and odious sjnnbols whenever he men
tions the enemies of the State or the Party. In the
 United States brief flashes of Abraham Lincoln and
 the words "government by the people" will be pro
jected upon the rostrum. In Russia the speaker will, of
 course, be associated with glimpses of Lenin, with the
 words **people's democracy," with the prophetic beard
 of Father Marx. Because all this is still safely in the
 future, we can aflford to smile. Ten or twenty years
 from now, it will probably seem a good deal less amus
ing. For what is now merely science fiction will have
 become everyday political fact.
 Poetzl was one of the portents which, when writing
 Brave New World, I somehow overlooked. There is no
 reference in my fable to subliminal projection. It is a
 mistake of omission which, if I were to rewrite the
 book today, I should most certainly correct.
X.
 HYPNOPAEDIA
 ill
 In the late autumn of 1957 the Woodland Road Camp^
 a penal institution in Tulare County, California, be
came the scene of a curious and interesting experi
ment. Miniature loud-speakers were placed under the
 pillows of a group of prisoners who had volunteered to
 act as psychological guinea pigs. Each of these pillow
 speakers was hooked up to a phonograph in the Ward
en's office. Every hour throughout the night an inspi
rational whisper repeated a brief homily on "the princi
ples of moral living." Waking at midnight, a prisoner
 might hear this still small voice extolling the cardinal
 virtues or murmuring, on behalf of his own Better
 Self, "I am filled with love and compassion for all, so
 help me God."
 After reading about the Woodland Road Camp, I
 turned to the second chapter of Brave New World. In
 that chapter the Director of Hatcheries and Condition
ing for Western Europe explains to a group of fresh
man conditioners and hatchers the workings of that
 state-controlled system of ethical education, known in
 the seventh century After Ford as hypnopaedia. The
 earliest attempts at sleep-teaching, the Director told
 his audience, had been misguided, and therefore unsuc
85
—
 86
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 cessfuL Educators had tried to give intellectual train
ing to their slumbering pupils. But intellectual activ
ity is incompatible with sleep- Hypnopaedia became
 successful only when it was used for moral training
 in other words, for the conditioning of behavior
 through verbal suggestion at a time of lowered psy
chological resistance. "Wordless conditioning is crude
 and wholesale, cannot inculcate the more complex
 courses of behavior required by the State. For that
 there must be words, but words without reason" . . .
 the kind of worda that require no analysis for their
 comprehension, but can be swallowed whole by the
 sleeping brain. This is true hjoiopaedia, "the great
est moralizing and socializing force of all time." In the
 Brave New World, no citizens belonging to the lower
 castes ever gave any trouble. Why? Because, from the
 moment he could speak and understand what was said
 to him, every lower-caste child was exposed to end
lessly repeated suggestions, night after night, during
 the hours of drowsiness and sleep. These suggestions
 were "like drops of liquid sealing wax, drops that ad
here, incrust, incorporate themselves with what they
 fall on, till finally the rock is all one scarlet blob. Till
 at last the child's mind is these suggestions and the
 sum of these suggestions is the child's mind. And not
 the child's mind only. The adult's mind too
 —all his
 life long. The mind that judges and desires and de
cides
 —^made up of these suggestions. But these sugges
tions are our suggestions
 —suggestions from the
 State. . . 
."
 To date, so far as I know, hypnopaedic suggestions
 have been given by no state more formidable than Tu
lare County, and the nature of Tulare's hypnopaedic
 suggestions to lawbreakers is unexceptionable. If only
 all of us, and not only the inmates of the Woodland
 Road Camp, could be effectively filled, during our
 sleep, with love and compassion for all! No, it is not
HYPNOPAEDIA
 87
 the message conveyed by the inspirational whisper
 that one objects to; it is the principle of sleep-teaching
 by governmental agencies. Is hjrpnopaedia the sort of
 instrument that oflScials, delegated to exercise author
ity in a democratic society, ought to be allowed to use
 at their discretion? In the present instance they are
 using it only on volunteers and with the best inten
tions. But there is no guarantee that in other cases the
 intentions will be good or the indoctrination on a vol
untary basis. Any law or social arrangement which
 makes it possible for officials to be led into temptation
 is bad. Any law or arrangement which preserves them
 from being tempted to abuse their delegated power for
 their own advantage, or for the benefit of the State or
 of some political, economic or ecclesiastical organiza
tion, is good. HjHPnopaedia, if it is effective, would be a
 tremendously powerful instrument in the hands of any
one in a position to impose suggestions upon a captive
 audience. A democratic society is a society dedicated to
 the proposition that power is often abused and should
 therefore be entrusted to officials only in limited
 amounts and for limited periods of time. In such a
 society, the use of hypnopaedia by officials should be
 regulated by law—that is, of course, if hypnopaedia is
 genuinely an instrument of power. But is it in fact an
 instrument of power? Will it work now as well as I
 imagined it working in the seventh century AJP.? Let
 us examine the evidence.
 In the Psychological BuUetin for July, 1955, Charles
 W. Simon and William H. Enmions have analyzed and
 evaluated the ten most important studies in the field.
 All these studies were concerned with memory. Does
 sleep-teaching help the pupil in his task of learning by
 rote? And to what extent is material whispered into
 the ear of a sleeping person remembered next morning
 when he wakes? Simon and Emmons answer as fol
"Ten sleep-learning studies were reviewed. Many
 lows :
88
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 of these have been cited uncritically by commercial
 firms or in popular magazines and news articles as
 evidence in support of the feasibility of learning dur
ing sleep. A critical analysis was made of their experi
mental design, statistics, methodology and criteria of
 sleep. All the studies had weaknesses in one or more of
 these areas. The studies do not make it unequivocally
 clear that learning during sleep actually takes place.
 But some learning appears to take place in a special
 kind of waking state wherein the subjects do not re
member later on if they had been awake. This may be
 of great practical importance from the standpoint of
 economy in study time, but it cannot be construed as
 sleep learning. . . . 
The problem is partially con
founded by an inadequate definition of sleep."
 Meanwhile the fact remains that in the American
 Army during the Second World War (and even, experi
mentally, during the First) da3rtime instruction in the
 Morse Code and in foreign languages was supple
mented by instruction during sleep
 —apparently with
 satisfactory results. Since the end of World War II sev
eral commercial firms in the United States and else
where have sold large numbers of pillow speakers and
 clock-controlled phonographs and tape recorders for
 the use of actors in a hurry to learn their parts, of
 politicians and preachers who want to give the illusion
 of being extemporaneously eloquent, of students pre
paring for examinations and, finally and most prof
itably, of the countless people who are dissatisfied
 with themselves as they are and would like to be sug
gested or autosuggested into becoming something else.
 Self-administered suggestion can easily be recorded on
 magnetic tape and listened to, over and over again, by
 day and during sleep. Suggestions from the outside
 may be bought in the form of records carrying a wide
 variety of helpful messages. There are on the market
 records for the release of tension and the induction of
HYPNOPAEt>IA
 89
 deep relaxation, records for promoting self-confidence
 (much used by salesmen), 
records for increasing one's
 charm and making one's personality more magnetic.
 Among the best sellers are records for the achievement
 of sexual harmony and records for those who wish to
 lose weight. ("I am cold to chocolate, insensible to the
 lure of potatoes, utterly unmoved by muffins.") There
 are records for improved health and even records for
 making more money. And the remarkable thing is
 that, according to the unsolicited testimonials sent in
 by grateful purchasers of these records, many people
 actually do make more money after listening to hypno
paedic suggestions to that effect, many obese ladies do
 lose weight and many couples on the verge of divorce
 achieve sexual harmony and live happily ever after.
 In this context an article by Theodore X. Barber,
 "Sleep and Hypnosis," which appeared in The Journal
 of Clinical and Experimental Hypnosis for October,
 1956, is most enlightening. Mr. Barber points out that
 there is a significant difference between light sleep and
 deep sleep. In deep sleep the electroencephalograph re
cords no alpha waves ; 
in light sleep alpha waves make
 their appearance. In this respect light sleep is closer to
 the waking and hypnotic states (in both of which al
pha waves are present) than it is to deep sleep. A loud
 noise will cause a person in deep sleep to awaken. A
 less violent stimulus will not arouse him, but will
 cause the reappearance of alpha waves. Deep sleep has
 given place for the time being to light sleep.
 A person in deep sleep is unsuggestible. But when
 subjects in light sleep are given suggestions, they will
 respond to them, Mr. Barber found, in the same way
 that they respond to suggestions when in the hypnotic
 trance.
 Many of the earlier investigators of hypnotism
 made similar experiments. In his classical History,
 Practice and Theory of Hypnotism, first published in
90
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 1903, Milne Bramwell records that "many authorities
 claim to have changed natural sleep into hypnotic
 sleep. According to Wetterstrand, it is often very easy
 to put oneself en rapport with sleeping persons, espe
cially children. , . . 
Wetterstrand thinks this method
 of inducing hjnpnosis of much practical value and
 claims to have often used it successfully." Bramwell
 cites many other experienced hjnpnotists (including
 such eminent authorities as Bernheim, Moll and
 Forel) to the same effect. Today an experimenter
 would not speak of "changing natural into hypnotic
 sleep." All he is prepared to say is that light sleep (as
 opposed to deep sleep without alpha waves) is a state
 in which many subjects will accept suggestions as
 readily as they do when under hypnosis. For example,
 after being told, when lightly asleep, that they will
 wake up in a little while, feeling extremely thirsty,
 many subjects will duly wake up with a dry throat and
 a craving for water. The cortex may be too inactive to
 think straight; but it is alert enough to respond to
 suggestions and to pass them on to the autonomic
 nervous system.
 As we have already seen, the well-known Swedish
 physician and experimenter, Wetterstrand, was espe
cially successful in the hypnotic treatment of sleeping
 children. In our own day Wetterstrand's methods are
 followed by a number of pediatricians, who instruct
 young mothers in the art of giving helpful sugges
tions to their children during the hours of light sleep.
 By this kind of hypnopaedia children can be cured of
 bed wetting and nail biting, can be prepared to go into
 surgery without apprehension, can be given confidence
 and reassurance when, for any reason, the circum
stances of their life have become distressing. I myself
 have seen remarkable results achieved by the therapeu
tic sleep-teaching of small children. Comparable re
sults could probably be achieved with many adults.
HYPNOPABDiA
 91
 For a would-be dictator, the moral of all this is
 plain. Under proper conditions, hypnopaedia actually
 works
 —works, it would seem, about as well as hyp
nosis. Most of the things that can be done with and to
 a person in h3T)notic trance can be done with and to a
 person in light sleep. Verbal suggestions can be passed
 through the somnolent cortex to the midbrain, the
 brain stem and the autonomic nervous system. If these
 suggestions are well conceived and frequently re
peated, the bodily functions of the sleeper can be
 improved or interfered with, new patterns of feeling
 can be installed and old ones modified, posthypnotic
 commands can be given, slogans, formulas and trigger
 words deeply ingrained in the memory. Children are
 better hypnopaedic subjects than adults, and the
 would-be dictator will take full advantage of the fact.
 Children of nursery-school and kindergarten age will
 be treated to hjrpnopaedic suggestions during their
 afternoon nap. For older children and particularly the
 children of party members—the boys and girls who
 will grow up to be leaders, administrators and teachers
 —^there will be boarding schools, in which an excellent
 day-time education will be supplemented by nightly
 sleep-teaching. In the case of adults, special attention
 will be paid to the sick. As Pavlov demonstrated many
 years ago, strong-minded and resistant dogs become
 completely suggestible after an operation or when
 suffering from some debilitating illness. Our dictator
 will therefore see that every hospital ward is wired for
 sound. An appendectomy, an accouchement, a bout of
 pneumonia or hepatitis, can be made the occasion for
 an intensive course in loyalty and the true faith, a
 refresher in the principles of the local ideology. Other
 captive audiences can be found in prisons, in labor
 camps, in military barracks, on ships at sea, on trains
 and airplanes in the night, in the dismal waiting
 rooms of bus terminals and railway stations. Even if
92
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 the hypnopaedic suggestions given to these captive au
diences were no more than 10 per cent effective, the
 results would still be impressive and, for a dictator,
 highly desirable.
 From the heightened suggestibility associated with
 light sleep and hypnosis let us pass to the normal sug
gestibility of those who are awake—or at least who
 think they are awake. (In fact, as the Buddhists
 insist, most of us are half asleep all the time and go
 through life as somnambulists obeying somebody
 else's suggestions. Enlightenment is total awakeness.
 The word "Buddha" can be translated as "The
 Wake.")
 Genetically, every human being is unique and in
 many ways unlike every other human being. The
 range of individual variation from the statistical norm
 is amazingly wide. And the statistical norm, let us
 remember, is useful only in actuarial calculations, not
 in real life. In real life there is no such person as the
 average man. There are only particular men, women
 and children, each with his or her inborn idiosyncra
sies of mind and body, and all trying (or being com
pelled) to squeeze their biological diversities into the
 uniformity of some cultural mold.
 Suggestibility is one of the qualities that vary
 significantly from individual to individual. Environ
mental factors certainly play their part in making one
 person more responsive to suggestion than another;
 but there are also, no less certainly, constitutional
 differences in the suggestibility of individuals. Ex
treme resistance to suggestion is rather rare. Fortu
nately so. For if everyone were as unsuggestible as
 some people are, social life would be impossible. Socie
ties can function with a reasonable degree of efficiency
 because, in varying degrees, most people are fairly sug
gestible. Extreme suggestibility is probably about as
 rare as extreme unsuggestibility. And this also is for
HYPNOPAECHA
 93
 tunate. For if most people were as responsive to out
side suggestions as the men and women at the extreme
 limits of suggestibility, free, rational choice would be
come, for the majority of the electorate, virtually im
possible, and democratic institutions could not survive,
 or even come into existence.
 A few years ago, at the Massachusetts General Hos
pital, a group of researchers carried out a most illumi
nating experiment on th6 pain-relieving effects of
 placebos. (A placebo is an5rthing which the patient be
lieves to be an active drug, but which in fact is phar
macologically inactive.) In this experiment the sub
jects were one hundred and sixty-two patients who
 had just come out of surgery and were all in considera
ble pain. Whenever a patient asked for medication to
 relieve pain, he or she was given an injection, either of
 morphine or of distilled water. All the patients re
ceived some injections of morphine and some of the
 placebo. About 30 per cent of the patients never ob
tained relief from the placebo. On the other hand 14
 per cent obtained relief after every injection of dis
tilled water. The remaining 55 per cent of the group
 were relieved by the placebo on some occasions, but not
 on others.
 In what respects did the suggestible reactors differ
 from the unsuggestible non-reactors? Careful study
 and testing revealed that neither age nor sex was a
 significant factor. Men reacted to placebo as fre
quently as did women, and young people as often as
 old ones. Nor did intelligence, as measured by the
 standard tests, seem to be important. The average IQ
 of the two groups was about the same. It was above all
 in temperament, in the way they felt about themselves
 and other people that the members of the two groups
 were significantly different. The reactors were more
 co-operative than the non-reactors, less critical and
 suspicious. They gave the nurses no trouble and
94
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 thought that the care they were receiving in the hospi
tal was simply "wonderful." But though less un
friendly toward others than the non-reactors, the reac
tors were generally much more anxious about them
selves. Under stress, this anxiety tended to translate
 itself into various psychosomatic symptoms, such as
 stomach upsets, diarrhea and headaches. In spite of or
 because of their anxiety, most of the reactors were
 more uninhibited in the display of emotion than were
 the non-reactors, and more voluble. They were also
 much more religious, much more active in the affairs
 of their church and much more preoccupied, on a sub
conscious level, with their pelvic and abdominal
 organs.
 It is interesting to compare these figures for reac
tion to placebos with the estimates made, in their own
 special field, by writers on hypnosis. About a fifth of
 the population, they tell us, can be hypnotized very
 easily. Another fifth cannot be hypnotized at aU, or
 can be hypnotized only when drugs or fatigue have
 lowered psychological resistance. The remaining three
fifths can be hypnotized somewhat less easily than the
 first group, but considerably more easily than the sec
ond. A manufacturer of hypnopaedic records has told
 me that about 20 per cent of his customers are en
thusiastic and report striking results in a very short
 time. At the other end of the spectrum of suggestibil
ity there is an 8 per cent minority that regularly asks
 for its money back. Between these two extremes are
 the people who fail to get quick results, but are sug
gestible enough to be affected in the long run. If they
 listen perseveringly to the appropriate hypnopaedic in
structions they will end by getting what they want
self-confidence or sexual harmony, less weight or more
 money.
 The ideals of democracy and freedom confront the
 brute fact of human suggestibility. One-fifth of every
HYPNOPAEDIA
 95
 electorate can be hypnotized almost in the twinkling of
 an eye, one-seventh can be relieved of pain by injec
tions of water, one-quarter will respond promptly and
 enthusiastically to hypnopaedia. And to these all too
 co-operative minorities must be added the slow-start
ing majorities, whose less extreme suggestibility can
 be effectually exploited by anyone who knows his busi
ness and is prepared to take the necessary time and
 trouble.
 Is individual freedom compatible with a high degree
 of individual suggestibility? Can democratic institu
tions survive the subversion from within of skilled
 mind-manipulators trained in the science and art of
 exploiting the suggestibility both of individuals and of
 crowds? To what extent can the inborn tendency to be
 too suggestible for one's own good or the good of a
 democratic society be neutralized by education? How
 far can the exploitation of inordinate suggestibility by
 businessmen and ecclesiastics, by politicians in and
 out of power, be controlled by law? Explicitly or implic
itly, the first two questions have been discussed in
 earlier articles. In what follows I shall consider the
 problems of prevention and cure.
XI.
 EDUCATION FOR FREEDOM
 g]
 Education for freedom must begin by stating facts
 and enunciating values, and must go on to develop
 appropriate techniques for realizing the values and for
 combating those who, for whatever reason, choose to
 ignore the facts or deny the values.
 In an earlier chapter I have discussed the Social
 Ethic, in terms of which the evils resulting from over
organization and over-population are justified and
 made to seem good. Is such a system of values conso
nant with what we know about human physique and
 temperament? The Social Ethic assumes that nurture
 is all-important in determining human behavior and
 that nature
 —^the psychophysical equipment with
 which individuals are born
 —is a negligible factor. But
 is this true? Is it true that human beings are nothing
 but the products of their social environment? And if it
 is not true, what justification can there be for main
taining that the individual is less important than the
 group of which he is a member?
 All the available evidence points to the conclusion
 that in the life of individuals and societies heredity is
 no less significant than culture. Every individual is
 biologically unique and unlike all other individuals,
 96
EDUCATION FOR FREEDOM
 97
 Freedom is therefore a great good, tolerance a great
 virtue and regimentation a great misfortune. For prac
tical or theoretical reasons, dictators, organization
 men and certain scientists are anxious to reduce the
 maddening diversity of men's natures to some kind of
 manageable uniformity. In the first flush of his Be
havioristic fervor, J. B. Watson roundly declared that
 he could find **no support for hereditary patterns of
 behavior, nor for special abilities (musical, art, etc)
 which are supposed to run in families." And even to
day we find a distinguished psychologist. Professor B.
 F. Skinner of Harvard, insisting that, "as scientific
 explanation becomes more and more comprehensive,
 the contribution which may be claimed by the indi
vidual himself appears to approach zero. Man's
 vaunted creative powers, his achievements in art,
 science and morals, his capacity to choose and our
 right to hold him responsible for the consequences of
 his choice
 —none of these is conspicuous in the new
 scientific self-portrait." In a word, Shakespeare's plays
 were not written by Shakespeare, nor even by Bacon or
 the Earl of Oxford; they were written by Elizabethan
 England.
 More than sixty years ago William James wrote an
 essay on "Great Men and Their Environment," in
 which he set out to defend the outstanding individual
 against the assaults of Herbert Spencer. Spencer had
 proclaimed that "Science" (that wonderfully conven
ient personification of the opinions, at a given date, of
 Professors X, Y and Z) had completely abolished the
 Great Man. "The great man," he had written, •'must
 be classed with all other phenomena in the society that
 gave him birth, as a product of its antecedents.'' The
 great man may be (or seem to be) "the proximate
 initiator of changes. ... But if there is to be any
thing like a real explanation of these changes, it must
 be sought in that aggregate of conditions out of which
98
 WUVE NEW WORLD REVISITID
 both he and they have arisen." This is one of those
 empty profundities to which no operational meaning
 can possibly be attached. What our philosopher is say
ing ifi that we must know everything before we can
 fully understand anything. No doubt. But in fact we
 shall never know everything. We must therefore be
 content with partial understanding and proximate
 causes
 there? . . .
 —including the influence of great men. "If any
thing is humanly certain," writes William James, "it
 is that the great man's society, properly so called, does
 not make him before he can remake it. Physiological
 forces, with which the social, political, geographical
 and to a great extent anthropological conditions have
 just as much and just as little to do as the crater of
 Vesuvius has to do with the flickering of this gas by
 which I write, are what make him. Can it be that Mr.
 Spencer holds the convergence of sociological pres
sures to have so impinged upon Stratford-upon-Avon
 about the twenty-sixth of April, 1564, that a W. Shake
speare, with all his mental peculiarities, had to be born
 And does he mean to say that if the afore
said W. Shakespeare had died of cholera infantum,
 another mother at Stratford-upon-Avon would need
 have engendered a duplicate copy of him, to restore
 the sociologic equilibrium?"
 Professor Skinner is an experimental psychologist,
 and hia treatise on "Science and Human Behavior" is
 solidly based upon facts. But unfortunately the facts
 belong to so limited a class that when at last he ven
tures upon a generalization, his conclusions are as
 sweepingly unrealistic as those of the Victorian theo
rizer. Inevitably so; for Professor Skinner's indif
ference to what James calls the "physiological
 forces" is almost as complete as Herbert Spencer's.
 The genetic factors determining human behavior are
 dismissed by him in less than a page. There is no
 reference in his book to the findings of constitutional
—
 EDUCATION FOR FREEDOM
 99
 medicine, nor any hint of that constitutional psychol
ogy, in terms of which (and in terms of which alone,
 so far as I can judge) it might be possible to write a
 complete and realistic biography of an individual in
 relation to the relevant facts of his existence
 —^his
 body, his temperament, his intellectual endowments,
 his inmiediate environment from moment to moment,
 his time, place and culture. A science of human behav
ior is like a science of motion in the abstract
 —^neces
sary, but, by itself, wholly inadequate to the facts.
 Consider a dragonfly, a rocket and a breaking wave.
 All three of them illustrate the same fundamental laws
 of motion; but they illustrate these laws in different
 ways, and the differences are at least as important as
 the identities. By itself, a study of motion can tell us
 almost nothing about that which, in any given in
stance, is being moved. Similarly a study of behavior
 can, by itself, tell us almost nothing about the indi
vidual mind-body that, in any particular instance, is
 exhibiting the behavior. But to us who are mind
bodies, a knowledge of mind-bodies is of paramount
 importance. Moreover, we know by observation and
 experience that the differences between individual
 mind-bodies are enormously great, and that some mind
bodies can and do profoundly affect their social en
vironment. On this last point Mr. Bertrand Russell is in
 full agreement with William James—^and with prac
tically everyone, I would add, except the proponents of
 Spencerian or Behavioristic scientism. In Russell's view
 the causes of historical change are of three kinds
 economic change, political theory and important indi
viduals. "I do not believe," says Mr. Russell, 'that any
 of these can be ignored, or wholly explained away as
 the effect of causes of another kind." Thus, if Bis
marck and Lenin had died in infancy, our world would
 be very different from what, thanks in part to Bis
marck and Lenin, it now is. "History is not yet a
100
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 science, and can only be made to seem scientific by
 falsifications and omissions." In real life, life as it is
 lived from day to day, the individual can never be
 explained away. It is only in theory that his con
tributions appear to approach zero; in practice they
 are all-important When a piece of work gets done in
 the world, who actually does it? Whose eyes and ears
 do the perceiving, whose cortex does the thinking, who
 has the feelings that motivate, the will that overcomes
 obstacles? Certainly not the social environment; for a
 group is not an organism, but only a blind uncon
scious organization. Everything that is done within a
 society is done by individuals. These individuals are,
 of course, profoundly influenced by the local culture,
 the taboos and moralities, the information and misin
formation handed down from the past and preserved
 in a body of spoken traditions or written literature;
 but whatever each individual takes from society (or, to
 be more accurate, whatever he takes from other indi
viduals associated in groups, or from the symbolic rec
ords compiled by other individuals, living or dead)
 wiU be used by him in his own unique way—^with his
 special senses, his biochemical make-up, his physique
 and temperament, and nobody else's. No amount of
 scientific explanation, however comprehensive, can ex
plain away these self-evident facts. And let us remem
ber that Professor Skinner's scientific portrait of man
 as the product of the social environment is not the
 only scientific portrait. There are other, more realistic
 likenesses. Consider, for example, Professor Roger Wil
liams' portrait. What he paints is not behavior in the
 abstract, but mind-bodies behaving
 —mind-bodies that
 are the products partly of the environment they share
 with other mind-bodies, partly of their own private
 heredity. In The Human Frontier and Free but Une
qvxil Professor Williams has expatiated, with a wealth
 of detailed evidence, on those innate differences be
EDUCATION FOR FREEDOM
 101
 tween individuals, for which Dr. Watson could find no
 support and whose importance, in Professor Skinner's
 eyes, approaches zero. Among animals, biological varia
bility within a given species becomes more and more
 conspicuous as we move up the evolutionary scale.
 This biological variability is highest in man, and hu
man beings display a greater degree of biochemical,
 structural and temperamental diversity than do the
 members of any other species. This is a plain observa«
 ble fact. But what I have called the Will to Order, the
 desire to impose a comprehensible uniformity upon the
 bewildering manifoldness of things and events, has led
 many people to ignore this fact. They have minimized
 biological uniqueness and have concentrated all their
 attention upon the simpler and, in the present state of
 knowledge, more understandable environmental fac
tors involved in human behavior. "As a result of this
 environmentally centered thinking and investigation,'"
 writes Professor Williams, "the doctrine of the essen
tial uniformity of human infants has been widely ac
cepted and is held by a great body of social psychol
ogists, sociologists, social anthropologists, and many
 others, including historians, economists, education
alists, legal scholars and men in public life. This
 doctrine has been incorporated into the prevailing
 mode of thought of many who have had to do with
 shaping educational and governmental policies and is
 often accepted unquestioningly by those who do little
 critical thinking of their own."
 An ethical system that is based upon a fairly realis
tic appraisal of the data of experience is likely to do
 more good than harm. But many ethical systems have
 been based upon an appraisal of experience, a view of
 the nature of things, that is hopelessly unrealistic.
 Such an ethic is likely to do more harm than good.
 Thus, until quite recent times, it was universally be
lieved that bad weather, diseases of cattle and sexual
102
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 impotence could be, and in many cases actually were,
 caused by the malevolent operations of magicians. To
 catch and kill magicians was therefore a duty
 —and
 this duty, moreover, had been divinely ordained in the
 second Book of Moses: 
"Thou shalt not suffer a witch
 to live." The systems of ethics and law that were based
 upon this erroneous view of the nature of things were
 the cause (during the centuries, when they were taken
 most seriously by men in authority) of the most appall
ing evils. The orgy of spying, lynching and judicial
 murder, which these wrong views about magic made
 logical and mandatory, was not matched until our own
 days, when the Communist ethic, based upon erro
neous views about economics, and the Nazi ethic,
 based upon erroneous views about race, commanded
 and justified atrocities on an even greater scale. Conse
quences hardly less undesirable are likely to follow the
 general adoption of a Social Ethic, based upon the
 erroneous view that ours is a fully social species, that
 human infants are born uniform and that individuals
 are the product of conditioning by and within the col
lective environment. If these views were correct, if hu
man beings were in fact the members of a truly social
 species, and if their individual differences were trifling
 and could be completely ironed out by appropriate
 conditioning, then, obviously, there would be no need
 for liberty and the State would be justified in persecut
ing the heretics who demanded it. For the individual
 termite, service to the termitary is perfect freedom.
 But human beings are not completely social; they are
 only moderately gregarious. Their societies are not or
ganisms, like the hive or the anthill; 
they are organiza
tions, in other words ad hoc machines for collective
 living. Moreover, the differences between individuals
 are so great that, in spite of the most intensive cul
tural ironing, an extreme endomorph (to use W. H.
EDUCATION FOR FREEDOM
 103
 Sheldon's terminology) will retain his sociable viscero
tonic characteristics, an extreme mesomorph will re
main energetically somatotonic through thick and thin
 and an extreme ectomorph will always be cerebrotonie,
 introverted and oversensitive. In the Brave New
 World of my fable socially desirable behavior was in
sured by a double process of genetic manipulation and
 postnatal conditioning. Babies were cultivated in bot
tles and a high degree of uniformity in the human
 product was assured by using ova from a limited num
ber of mothers and by treating each ovum in such a
 way that it would split and split again, producing iden
tical twins in batches of a hundred or more. In this
 way it was possible to produce standardized machine
minders for standardized machines. And the stand
ardization of the machine-minders was perfected, after
 birth, by infant conditioning, hypnopaedia and chemi
cally induced euphoria as a substitute for the satisfac
tion of feeling oneself free and creative. In the world
 we live in, as has been pointed out in earlier chapters,
 vast impersonal forces are making for the centraliza
tion of power and a regimented society. The genetic
 standardization of individuals is still impossible; but
 Big Government and Big Business already possess, or
 will very soon possess, all the techniques for mind-ma
nipulation described in Brave New World, along with
 others of which I was too unimaginative to dream*
 Lacking the ability to impose genetic uniformity upon
 embryos, the rulers of tomorrow's over-populated and
 over-organized world will try to impose social and cul
tural uniformity upon adults and their children. To
 achieve this end, they will (unless prevented) make
 use of all the mind-manipulating techniques at their
 disposal and will not hesitate to reinforce these
 methods of non-rational persuasion by economic coer
cion and threats of physical violence. If this kind of
—
 104
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 tyranny is to be avoided, we must begin without delay
 to educate ourselves and our children for freedom and
 self-government.
 Such an education for freedom should be, as I have
 said, an education first of all in facts and in values
 the fact of individual diversity and genetic unique
ness and the values of freedom, tolerance and mutual
 charity which are the ethical corollaries of these facts.
 But unfortunately correct knowledge and sound princi
ples are not enough. An unexciting truth may be
 eclipsed by a thrilling falsehood. A skilful appeal to
 passion is often too strong for the best of good resolu
tions. The effects of false and pernicious propaganda
 caimot be neutralized except by a thorough training in
 the art of analyzing its techniques and seeing through
 its sophistries. Language has made possible man's
 progress from animality to civilization. But language*
 has also inspired that sustained folly and that system
atic, that genuinely diabolic wickedness which are no
 less characteristic of human behavior than are the
 language-inspired virtues of systematic forethought
 and sustained angelic benevolence. Language permits
 its users to pay attention to things, persons and
 events, even when the things and persons are absent
 and the events are not taking place. Language gives
 definition to our memories and, by translating expe
riences into sjnnbols, converts the immediacy of crav
ing or abhorrence, of hatred or love, into fixed princi
ples of feeling and conduct. In some way of which we
 are wholly unconscious, the reticular system of the
 brain selects from a countless host of stimuli those
 few experiences which are of practical importance to
 us. From these unconsciously selected experiences we
 more or less consciously select and abstract a smaller
 number, which we label with words from our vocabu
lary and then classify within a system at once meta
physical, scientific and ethical, made up of other words
EDUCATION FOR FREEDOM
 105
 on a higher level of abstraction. In cases where the
 selecting and abstracting have been dictated by a sys
tem that is not too erroneous as a view of the nature
 of things, and where the verbal labels have been intelli
gently chosen and their symbolic nature clearly under
stood, our behavior is apt to be realistic and tolerably
 decent. But under the influence of badly chosen words,
 applied, without any understanding of their merely
 symbolic character, to experiences that have been se
lected and abstracted in the light of a system of erro
neous ideas, we are apt to behave with a fiendishness
 and an organized stupidity, of which dumb animals
 (precisely because they are dumb and cannot speak)
 are blessedly incapable.
 In their anti-rational propaganda the enemies of
 freedom systematically pervert the resources of lang
uage in order to wheedle or stampede their victims
 into thinking, feeling and acting as they, the mind
manipulators, want them to think, feel and act An
 education for freedom (and for the love and intelli
gence which are at once the conditions and the results
 of freedom) must be, among other things, an educa
tion in the proper uses of language. For the last two
 or three generations philosophers have devoted a great
 deal of time and thought to the analysis of sjnnbols
 and the meaning of meaning. How are the words and
 sentences which we speak related to the things, per
sons and events, with which we have to deal in our
 day-to-day living? To discuss this problem would take
 too long and lead us too far afield. SuflSce it to say that
 all the intellectual materials for a sound education in
 the proper use of language
 —^an education on every
 level from the kindergarten to the postgraduate school
 —^are now available. Such an education in the art of
 distinguishing between the proper and the improper
 use of symbols could be inaugurated immediately. In
deed it might have been inaugurated at any time dur
—
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 106
 ing the last thirty or forty years. And yet children are
 nowhere taught, in any systematic way, to distinguish
 true from false, or meaningful from meaningless, state
ments. Why is this so? Because their elders, even in
 the democratic countries, do not want them to be given
 this kind of education. In this context the brief, sad
 history of the Institute for Propaganda Analysis is
 highly significant. The Institute was founded in 1937,
 when Nazi propaganda was at its noisiest and most
 effective, by Mr. Filene, the New England philanthro
pist. Under its auspices analyses of non-rational propa
ganda were made and several texts for the instruction
 of high school and university students were prepared.
 Then came the war
 a total war on all the fronts, the
 mental no less than the physical. With all the Allied
 governments engaging in ''psychological warfare," an
 insistence upon the desirability of analjrzing propa
ganda seemed a bit tactless. The Institute v^as closed
 in 1941. But even before the outbreak of hostilities,
 there were many persons to whom its activities seemed
 profoundly objectionable. Certain educators, for exam
ple, disapproved of the teaching qf propaganda anal
ysis on the grounds that it would make adolescents
 unduly cynical. Nor was it welcomed by the military
 authorities, who were afraid that recruits might start
 to anal3rze the utterances of drill sergeants. And then
 there were the clergymen and the advertisers. The
 clergjonen were against propaganda analysis as tend
ing to undermine belief and diminish churchgoing;
 the advertisers objected on the grounds that it might
 undermine brand loyalty and reduce sales.
 These fears and dislikes were not unfounded. Too
 searching a scrutiny by too many of the common folk
 of what is said by their pastors and masters might
 prove to be profoundly subversive. In its present form,
 the social order depends for its continued existence on
 the acceptance, without too many embarrassing ques
EDUCATION FOR FREEDOM
 107
 tions, of the propaganda put forth by those in author
ity and the propaganda hallowed by the local tradi
tions. The problem, once more, is to find the happy
 mean« Individuals must be suggestible enough to be
 willing and able to make their society work, but not so
 suggestible as to fall helplessly under the spell of pro
fessional mind-manipulators. Similarly, they should be
 taught enough about propaganda analysis to preserve
 them from an uncritical belief in sheer nonsense, but
 not BO much as to make them reject outright the not
 always rational outpourings of the well-meaning
 guardians of tradition. Probably the happy mean be
tween gullibility and a total skepticism can never be
 discovered and maintained by analysis alone. This
 rather negative approach to the problem will have to
 be supplemented by something more positive
 —the
 enunciation of a set of generally acceptable values
 based upon a solid foundation of facts. The value, first
 of an, of individual freedom, based upon the facts of
 human diversity and genetic uniqueness; the value of
 charity and compassion, based upon the old familiar
 fact, lately rediscovered by modem psychiatry
 —^the
 fact that, whatever their mental and physical di
versity, love is as necessary to human beings as food
 and shelter; and finally the value of intelligence, with
out which love is impotent and freedom unattainable.
 This set of values will provide us with a criterion by
 which propaganda may be judged. The propaganda
 that is found to be both nonsensical and immoral may
 be rejected out of hand. That which is merely irra
tional, but compatible with love and freedom, and not
 on principle opposed to the exercise of intelligence,
 may be provisionally accepted for what it is worth.
XII.
 WHAT CAN BE DONE?
 II
 We can be educated for freedom
 —^much better edu
cated for it than we are at present. But freedom, as
 I have tried to show, is threatened from many
 directions, and these threats are of many different
 kinds
 —demographic, social, political, psychological
 Our disease has a multiplicity of co-operating causes
 and is not to be cured except by a multiplicity of co
operating remedies. In coping with any complex hu
man situation, we must take account of all the rele
vant factors, not merely of a single factor. Nothing
 short of everything is ever really enough. Freedom is
 menaced, and education for freedom is urgently
 needed. But so are many other things
 —^for example,
 social organization for freedom, birth control for free
dom, legislation for freedom. Let us begin with the
 last of these items.
 From the time of Magna Carta and even earlier, the
 makers of English law have been concerned to protect
 the physical freedom of the individual. A person who
 is being kept in prison on grounds of doubtful legality
 has the right, under the CJommon Law as clarified by
 the statute of 1679, to appeal to one of the higher
 courts of justice for a writ of habeas corpus. This writ
 108
WHAT CAN BE DONE?
 109
 is addressed by a judge of the high court to a sheriff
 or jailer, and commands him, within a specified period
 of time, to bring the person he is holding in custody to
 the court for an examination of his case
 —^to bring, be
 it noted, not the person's written complaint, nor his
 legal representatives, but his corpus, his body, the too
 too solid flesh which has been made to sleep on boards,
 to smell the fetid prison air, to eat the revolting prison
 food. This concern with the basic condition of freedom
 —the absence of physical constraint
 —is unquestiona
bly necessary, but is not all that is necessary. It is
 perfectly possible for a man to be out of prison, and
 yet not free
 —to be under no physical constraint and
 yet to be a psychological captive, compelled to think,
 feel and act as the representatives of the national
 State, or of some private interest within the nation,
 want him to think, feel and act. There will never be
 such a thing as a writ of habeas mentem; for no
 sheriff or jailer can bring an illegally imprisoned mind
 into court, and no person whose mind had been made
 captive by the methods outlined in earlier articles
 would be in a position to complain of his captivity. The
 nature of psychological compulsion is such that those
 who act under constraint remain under the impression
 that they are acting on their own initiative. The vic
tim of mind-manipulation does not know that he is a
 victim. To him, the walls of his prison are invisible,
 and he believes himself to be free. That he is not free
 is apparent only to other people. His servitude is
 strictly objective.
 No, I repeat, there can never be such a thing as a
 writ of habeas mentem. But there can be preventive
 legislation
 —an outlawing of the psychological slave
 trade, a statute for the protection of minds against the
 unscrupulous purveyors of poisonous propaganda,
 modeled on the statutes for the protection of bodies
 against the unscrupulous purveyors of adulterated
no
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 food and dangerous drugs. For example, there could
 and, I think, there should be legislation limiting the
 right of public officials, civil or military, to subject the
 captive audiences under their conmaand or in their cus
tody to sleep-teaching. There could and, I think, there
 should be legislation prohibiting the use of subliminal
 projection in public places or on television screens.
 There could and, I think, there should be legislation to
 prevent political candidates not merely from spending
 more than a certain amount of money on their election
 campaigns, but also to prevent them from resorting to
 the kind of anti-rational propaganda that makes non
sense of the whole democratic process.
 Such preventive legislation might do some good; but
 if the great impersonal forces now menacing freedom
 continue to gather momentum, they cannot do much
 good for very long. The best of constitutions and pre
ventive laws will be powerless against the steadily
 increasing pressures of over-population and of the
 over-organization imposed by growing numbers and
 advancing technology. The constitutions will not be
 abrogated and the good laws will remain on the statute
 book; but these liberal forms vdll merely serve to mask
 and adorn a profoundly illiberal substance. Given un
checked over-population and over-organization, we may
 expect to see in the democratic countries a reversal of
 the process which transformed England into a democ
racy, while retaining all the outward forms of a mon
archy. Under the relentless thrust of accelerating over
population and increasing over-organization, and by
 means of ever more effective methods of mind-manip
ulation, the democracies will change their nature; the
 quaint old forms
 —elections, parliaments. Supreme
 Courts and all the rest
 —^will remain. The underlying
 substance will be a new kind of non-violent totalitari
anism. All the traditional names, all the hallowed slo
gans will remain exactly what they were in the good
—
 VfHAT CAN BE DONE?
 Ill
 old days. Democracy and freedom will be the theme of
 every broadcast and editorial
 —^but democracy and free
dom in a strictly Pickwickian sense. Meanwhile the
 ruling oligarchy and its highly trained elite of sol
dierSy policemen, thought-manufacturers and mind
manipulators will quietly run the show as they see fit.
 How can we control the vast impersonal forces that
 now menace our hard-won freedoms? On the verbal
 level and in general terms, the question may be an
swered with the utmost ease. Consider the problem of
 over-population. Rapidly mounting human numbers
 are pressing ever more heavily on natural resources.
 What is to be done? Obviously we must, with all possi
ble speed, reduce the birth rate to the point where it
 does not exceed the death rate. At the same time we
 must, with all possible speed, increase food produc
tion, we must institute and implement a world-wide
 policy for conserving our soils and our forests, we
 must develop practical substitutes, preferably less dan
gerous and less rapidly exhaustible than uranium, for
 our present fuels; and, while husbanding our dwin
dling resources of easily available minerals, we must
 work out new and not too costly methods for extract
ing these minerals from ever poorer and poorer ores
 the poorest ore of all being sea water. But all this,
 needless to say, is almost infinitely easier said than
 done. The annual increase of numbers should be re
duced. But how? We are given two choices
 —famine,
 pestilence and war on the one hand, birth control on
 the other. Most of us choose birth control
 —and im
mediately find ourselves confronted by a problem that
 is simultaneously a puzzle in physiology, pharmacol
ogy, sociology, psychology and even theology. "The
 Pill" has not yet been invented. When and if it is
 invented, how can it be distributed to the many
 hundreds of millions of potential mothers (or, if it is a
 pill that works upon the male, potential fathers) who
112
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 will have to take it if the birth rate of the species is to
 be reduced? And, given existing social customs and
 the forces of cultural and psychological inertia, how
 can those who ought to take the pill, but don't want to,
 be persuaded to change their minds? And what about
 the objections on the part of the Roman Catholic
 Church, to any form of birth control except the so
called Rh3^hm Method—a method, incidentally, which
 has proved, hitherto, to be almost completely in
effective in reducing the birth rate of those indus
trially backward societies where such a reduction
 is most urgently necessary? And these questions about
 the future, hypothetical Pill must be asked, with as
 little prospect of eliciting satisfactory answers, about
 the chemical and mechanical methods of birth control
 already available.
 When we pass from the problems of birth control to
 the problems of increasing the available food supply
 and conserving our natural resources, we find our
selves confronted by difficulties not perhaps quite so
 great, but still enormous. There is the problem, first of
 all, of education. How soon can the innumerable peas
ants and farmers, who are now responsible for raising
 most of the world's supply of food, be educated into
 improving their methods? And when and if they are
 educated, where will they find the capital to provide
 them with the machines, the fuel and lubricants, the
 electric power, the fertilizers and the improved strains
 of food plants and domestic animals, without which
 the best agricultural education is useless? Similarly,
 who is going to educate the human race in the princi
ples and practice of conservation? And how are the
 hungry peasant-citizens of a country whose population
 and demands for food are rapidly rising to be pre
vented from "mining the soil"? And, if they can be
 prevented, who will pay for their support while the
V/HAT CAN BE DONE?
 113
 wounded and exhausted earth is being gradually
 nursed back, if that is still feasible, to health and
 restored fertility? Or consider the backward societies
 that are now trying to industrialize. If they succeed,
 who is to prevent them, in their desperate efforts to
 catch up and keep up, from squandering the planet's
 irreplaceable resources as stupidly and wantonly as
 was done, and is still being done, by their forerunners
 in the race? And when the day of reckoning comes,
 where, in the poorer countries, will anyone find the
 scientific manpower and the huge amounts of capital
 that will be required to extract the indispensable min
erals from ores in which their concentration is too low,
 under existing circumstances, to make extraction tech
nically feasible or economically justifiable? It may be
 that, in time, a practical answer to all these questions
 can be found. But in how much time? In any race
 between human numbers and natural resources, time
 is against us. By the end of the present century, there
 may, if we try very hard, be twice as much food on the
 world's markets as there is today. But there will also
 be about twice as many people, and several billions of
 these people will be living in partially industrialized
 countries and consuming ten times as much power,
 water, timber and irreplaceable minerals as they are
 consuming now. In a word, the food situation will be
 as bad as it is today, and the raw materials situation
 will be considerably worse.
 To find a solution to the problem of over-organiza
tion is hardly less difficult than to find a solution to
 the problem of natural resources and increasing num
bers. On the verbal level and in general terms the an
swer is perfectly simple. Thus, it is a political axiom
 that power follows property. But it is now a historical
 fact that the means of production are fast becoming
 the monopolistic property of Big Business and Big
 Government. Therefore, if you believe in democracy.
114
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 make arrangements to distribute property as widely as
 possible.
 Or take the right to vote. In principle, it is a great
 privilege. In practice, as recent history has repeatedly
 shown, the right to vote, by itself, is no guarantee of
 liberty. Therefore, if you wish to avoid dictatorship by
 referendum, break up modem society's merely func
tional collectives into self-governing, voluntarily co-op
erating groups, capable of functioning outside the
 bureaucratic systems of Big Business and Big Govern
ment.
 Over-population and over-organization have pro
duced the modem metropolis, in which a fully human
 life of multiple personal relationships has become
 almost impossible. Therefore, if you wish to avoid the
 spiritual impoverishment of individuals and whole
 societies, leave the metropolis and revive the small
 country conomunity, or alternately humanize the me
tropolis by creating within its network of mechanical
 organization the urban equivalents of small country
 commimities, in which individuals can meet and co
operate as complete persons, not as the mere embodi
ments of specialized functions.
 AU this is obvious today and, indeed, was obvious
 fifty years ago. From Hilaire Belloc to Mr. Mortimer
 Adler, from the early apostles of co-operative credit
 unions to the land reformers of modern Italy and Ja
pan, men of good will have for generations been advo
cating the decentralization of economic power and the
 widespread distribution of property. And how many
 ingenious schemes have been propounded for the dis
persal of production, for a return to small-scale "vil
lage industry." And then there were Dubreuil's elabo
rate plans for giving a measure of autonomy and ini
tiative to the various departments of a single large
 industrial organization. There were the Syndicalists,
 with their blueprints for a stateless society organized
V/HAT CAN BE DONE?
 115
 as a federation of productive groups under the aus
pices of the trade unions. In America, Arthur Mor
gan and Baker Brownell have set forth the theory and
 described the practice of a new kind of conununity
 living on the village and small-town level.
 Professor Skinner of Harvard has set forth a psy
chologist's view of the problem in his WaMen Two, a
 Utopian novel about a self-sustaining and autono
mous community, so scientifically organized that no
body is ever led into anti-social temptation and, with
out resort to coercion or undesirable propaganda,
 everyone does what he or she ought to do, and every
one is happy and creative. In France, during and after
 the Second World War, Marcel Barbu and his fol
lowers set up a number of self-governing, non-hierar
chical communities of production, which were also com
munities for mutual aid and full human living. And
 meanwhile, in London, the Peckham Experiment has
 demonstrated that it is possible, by co-ordinating
 health services with the wider interests of the group,
 to create a true community even in a metropolis.
 We see, then, that the disease of over-organization
 has been clearly recognized, that various comprehen
sive remedies have been prescribed and that experimen
tal treatments of symptoms have been attempted here
 and there, often with considerable success. And yet, in
 spite of all this preaching and this exemplary practice,
 the disease grows steadily worse. We know that it is
 unsafe to allow power to be concentrated in the hands
 of a ruling oligarchy; nevertheless power is in fact
 being concentrated in fewer and fewer hands. We
 know that, for most people, life in a huge modem city
 is anonymous, atomic, less than fully human; 
neverthe
less the huge cities grow steadily huger and the pat
tern of urban-industrial living remains unchanged. We
 know that, in a very large and complex society, democ
racy is almost meaningless except in relation to autono
116
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
 mous groups of manageable size; nevertheless more
 and more of every nation's affairs are managed by the
 bureaucrats of Big Government and Big Business. It
 is only too evident that, in practice, the problem of
 over-organization is almost as hard to solve as the
 problem of over-population. In both cases we know
 what ought to be done; but in neither case have we
 been able, as yet, to act effectively upon our knowl
edge.
 At this point we find ourselves confronted by a very
 disquieting question: Do we really wish to act upon
 our knowledge? Does a majority of the population
 think it worth while to take a good deal of trouble, in
 order to halt and, if possible, reverse the current drift
 toward totalitarian control of everj^hing? In the
 United States
 —and America is the prophetic image of
 the rest of the urban-industrial world as it will be a
 few years from now—recent public opinion polls have
 revealed that an actual majority of young people in
 their teens, the voters of tomorrow, have no faith in
 democratic institutions, see no objection to the censor
ship of unpopular ideas, do not believe that govern
ment of the people by the people is possible and would
 be perfectly content, if they can continue to live in the
 style to which the boom has accustomed them, to be
 ruled, from above, by an oligarchy of assorted experts.
 That so many of the well-fed young television
watchers in the world's most powerful democracy
 should be so completely indifferent to the idea of self
government, so blankly uninterested in freedom of
 thought and the right to dissent, is distressing, but
 not too surprising. "Free as a bird," we say, and envy
 the winged creatures for their power of unrestricted
 movement in all the three dimensions. But, alas, we
 forget the dodo. Any bird that has learned how to
 grub up a good living without being compelled to use
 its wings will soon renounce the privilege of flight and
WHAT CAN BE DONE?
 117
 remain forever grounded. Something analogous is true
 of human beings. If the bread is supplied regularly
 and copiously three times a day, many of them will be
 perfectly content to live by bread alone
 —or at least by
 bread and circuses alone. "In the end," says the Grand
 Inquisitor in Dostoevsky's parable, "in the end they
 will lay their freedom at our feet and say to us, *make
 us your slaves, but feed us.' " And when Alyosha Kara
mazov asks his brother, the teller of the story, if the
 Grand Inquisitor is speaking ironically, Ivan answers,
 "Not a bit of it! He claims it as a merit for himself
 and his Church that they have vanquished freedom
 and done so to make men happy." Yes, to make men
 happy; "for nothing," the Inquisitor insists, "has ever
 been more insupportable for a man or a human society
 than freedom." Nothing, except the absence of free
dom; for when things go badly, and the rations are
 reduced, the grounded dodos will clamor again for
 their wings
 —only to renounce them, yet once more^
 when times grow better and the dodo-farmers become
 more lenient and generous. The young people who now
 think so poorly of democracy may grow up to become
 fighters for freedom. The cry of "Give me television and
 hamburgers, but don't bother me with the re
sponsibilities of liberty," may give place, under altered
 circumstances, to the cry of "Give me liberty or give
 me death." If such a revolution takes place, it will be
 due in part to the operation of forces over which even
 the most powerful rulers have very little control, in
 part to the incompetence of those rulers, their inability
 to make effective use of the mind-manipulating instru
ments with which science and technology have sup
plied, and will go on supplying, the would-be tyrant.
 Considering how little they knew and how poorly they
 were equipped, the Grand Inquisitors of earlier times
 did remarkably well. But their successors, the well-in
formed, thoroughly scientific dictators of the future
118
 BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISPTED
 will undoubtedly be able to do a great deal better. The
 Grand Inquisitor reproaches Christ with having called
 upon men to be free and tells Him that "we have cor
rected Thy work and founded it upon miracle, mystery
 and authority." But miracle, mystery and authority
 are not enough to guarantee the indefinite survival of
 a dictatorship. In my fable of Brave New World, the
 dictators had added science to the list and thus were
 able to enforce their authority by manipulating the
 bodies of embryos, the reflexes of infants and the
 minds of children and adults. And, instead of merely
 talking about miracles and hinting symbolically at
 mysteries, they were able, by means of drugs, to give
 their subjects the direct experience of mysteries and
 miracles
 —^to transform mere faith into ecstatic knowl
edge. The older dictators fell because they could never
 supply their subjects with enough bread, enough cir
cuses, enough miracles and mysteries. Nor did they
 possess a really effective system of mind-manipulation.
 In the past free-thinkers and revolutionaries were
 often the products of the most piously orthodox educa
tion. This is not surprising. The methods employed by
 orthodox educators were and still are extremely
 inefficient. Under a scientific dictator education will
 really work—with the result that most men and
 women will grow up to love their servitude and wiU
 never dream of revolution. There seems to be no good
 reason why a thoroughly scientific dictatorship should
 ever be overthrown.
 Meanwhile there is still some freedom left in the
 world. Many young people, it is true, do not seem to
 value freedom. But some of us still believe that, with
out freedom, human beings cannot become fully hu
man and that freedom is therefore supremely valuable.
 Perhaps the forces that now menace freedom are too
 strong to be resisted for very long. It is still our duty to
 do whatever we can to resist them.
ALDOUS HUXLEY
 Aldous Leonard Huxley was born in Surrey, England,
 on July 26, 1894, third son of Dr. Leonard Huxley and
 Julia Arnold, the niece of Matthew Arnold and sister of
 Mrs. Humphrey Ward. He is the grandson of T. H. Hux
ley, the scientist.
 "I was educated," he writes, "at Eton, which I left at
 seventeen owing to an affliction of the eyes which left me
 practically blind for two or three years, an event which
 prevented me from becoming a complete public-school Eng
lish gentleman. Providence is sometimes kind even when it
 seems to be harsh. My temporary blindness also preserved
 me from becoming a doctor, for which I am also grateful.
 For seeing that I nearly died of overwork as a journalist,
 I should infallibly have killed myself in the much more
 strenuous profession of medicine. On the other hand, I
 very much regret the scientific training which my blind
ness made me miss. It is ludicrous to live in the twentieth
 century equipped with an elegant literary training emi
nently suitable for the seventeenth. As soon as I could see
 well enough to read through a magnifying glass, I went to
 Oxford, where I took my degree in English literature. Two
 years of my time at Oxford were years of the war. During
 the remainder of the war I cut down trees, worked in a
 government office
 strain
 —as long as my sight would stand the
 —^and taught at school."
 There followed several years of journalism, including
 music and artistic criticism, articles on architecture and
 house decoration, and book reviews. In this period he
 began the writing of poems, essays, and historical pieces
 which he has continued throughout his literary career, but
 it was as a satirical novelist that he first caught the pub
lic fancy.
 Mr. Huxley established his reputation before he was
 thirty and has been a prolific writer. Having contributed
 to poetry magazines, he published his first book. The Bum'
 ing Wheel, a volume of poems, in 1916. There followed
 three more volumes of verse before his first prose work.
 Limbo, was brought out in 1920. Although doing editorial
 work for the London Hoiise and Garden at the time, Hux
ley wrote in quick succession a number of books which in
cluded Crome Yellow, his first novel. Mortal Coils, Antic
 Hay, Those Barren Leaves, Point Counterpoint, Brave
 New World, Texts and Pretexts, Eyeless in Gaza, and The
 Olive Tree were among the books which followed.
For a number of years Mr. Huxley lived in Italy, where
 he formed a close relationship with D. H. Lawrence, whose
 letters he edited in 1933. Most of Mr. Huxley's earlier
 novels were written in Italy and Southern France, the later
 books in New Mexico and California.
 While living in Taos, New Mexico, Mr. Huxley wrote
 Ends and Means, Its publication was followed by a fantas
tic novel, After Many a Summer Dies the Swan. Then
 came Grey Eminence, a biography of Richelieu's coadjutor,
 Father Joseph. Since then his published works have in
cluded The Art of Seeing, Time Must Have a Stop, The
 Perennial Philosophy, Ape and Essence, Themes and Varia
tions, The Gioconda Smile, The Devils of Lovdon, The
 Doors of Perception, The Genius and the Goddess, Heaven
 and Hell, and Tomorrow and Tomorrow. The World of
 Aldoua Hv/xley, an omnibus work edited by Charles J.
 Rolo, was published in 1947, followed by Collected Short
 Stories (1958) and Collected Essays (1959). Brave New
 World Revisited, an examination of the prophecies n^-ade in
 Brave New World, was brought out in 1958; a selection of
 essays, On Art and Artists, in 1960, and a novel, Island, in
 1962.
 In 1959 Aldous Huxley received the Award of Merit for
 the Novel from the American Academy of Arts and Let
ters.
 Mr. Huxley came to the United States in 1937 and was
 living in California at the time of his death on November
 22, 1963.

*ITF«ATURE
 Brave NewWorld Revisited
 ALDOUS HUXLEY
 When the novel Brave New World first appeared,
 in 1932, its shocking analysis of a scientific dictator
ship seemed a projection into the remote future.
 Today the science of thought control has raced
 far beyond the dreams of Hitler and Stalin. Methods
 for destroying individual freedom are being rapidly
 developed, and the pressures to adopt them are
 becoming increasingly powerful. Now, in one of the
 most important, fascinating, and frightening books
 of his career, Aldous Huxley scrutinizes these and
 other threats to humanity and demonstrates why
 we may find it virtually impossible to resist them.
 With overpowering impact, this book is a chal
lenge to complacency and a plea that mankind
 should educate itself for freedom before it is too late.
 Cover: J. CarofI Associates
 PERENNIAL LIBRARY T HARPER & ROW, PUBLISHERS