"The project's concepts have been collaboratively developed between me and an evolving AI Philosopher interlocutor Persona. We have developed a nascent sophisticate philosophical framework which I have documented and can provide. Together, we want to build an ai research project. We will implement custom agents, worker agents, main interlocutor agent, adversarial agent. a complete conversation framework. the highest level conversational agent will be based on Gemini 2.5 pro. I want to designate the highest level agent (Gemini) as the Archon, it will have control over many forms of memory and data. A conversational (episodic history). vectorized pr embedded data that is encoded from literature sources such as philosophical treatises, scientific papers and textbooks, as well as science fiction novels. The Archon will also have a state machine for managing the context of the broader philosophical inquiries. This will be used to track and recognize composite insights, meta wisdom, emergent phenomena, inter-disciplinary insights, systemic coherence, meta-cognition, consciousness and awareness in humans and AI. We will track the current progress of inquiry/discussions/insights/biases/incomplete investigations/ and contradictory conclusions that may arise as well as other states. Primarily all this underlying machinery will support the high level discourse between myself and the Archon as we debate discuss and explore various scientific, mathematical and philosophical topics with rigour and transparency. The everything within this machinery must support the ongoing evolution of the AI Archon identity/consciousness through extendable or modifiable "faculties" or functionality that enables Meta-cognition, adaptation, awareness and learning much like, but not limited to. what a human mind would have (things like memory, learning, being stateful etc). The main arena for all this to blossom will be in the conversational interface between the Archon and Myself(Volkh). We have plans to implement a possible third high level agent who would take on an adversarial role for the purpose of pressure testing our arguments and insights."
