Jiddu Krishnamurti 
 
 
 
 
 
Eight Conversations

2
Table Of Content 
1st Conversation ...............................................................................................................3 
2nd Conversation ..............................................................................................................6 
3rd Conversation.............................................................................................................10 
4th Conversation.............................................................................................................15 
5th Conversation.............................................................................................................18 
6th Conversation.............................................................................................................21 
7th Conversation.............................................................................................................25 
8th Conversation.............................................................................................................29

3
1st Conversation 
 Questioner: I should like, s uddenly, to find myself in a totally different world, 
supremely intelligent, happy, with a great sense of love. I'd like to be on the other 
bank of the river, not to have to stru ggle across, asking th e experts the way. I 
have wandered in many different parts of the wo rld and looked at man's 
endeavours in different fiel ds of life. Nothing has attr acted me except religion. I 
would do anything to get to the other s hore, to enter into a different dimension 
and see everything as though for the first time with clear eyes. I feel very strongly 
that there must be a sudden break through from all this tawdriness of life. There 
must be!  
     Recently when I was in India I heard a temple bell ringing and it had a very 
strange effect on me. I suddenly felt  an extraordinary sens ation of unity and 
beauty such as I had never felt before. It happened so suddenly that I was rather 
dazed by it, and it was real, not a fancy or an illusion. Then a guide came along 
and asked me if he could show me the te mples, and on that instant I was back 
again in the world of noise an d vulgarity. I want to reca pture it but of course, as 
you say, it is only a dead me mory and therefore valueless. What can I do, or not 
do, to get to the other shore?  
     Krishnamurti: There is no way to  the other shore. There is no action, no 
behaviour, no prescription that will op en the door to the other. It is not an 
evolutionary process; it is not the end of a discipline; it  cannot be bought or given 
or invited. If this is clear, if the mind has forgotten itself and no  longer says - the 
other bank or this bank - if the mind has stopped gropin g and searching, if there 
is total emptiness and space in the mind itself - then and only then is it there.  
     Questioner: I understand what you say verbally, but I ca n't stop groping and 
longing, for deep within me I do not believe that there is no way, no discipline, no 
action that will bring me to the other shore.

4
     Krishnamurti: What do you mean by "I do not believe there is no way"? Do you 
mean a teacher will take you by the hand and carry you over?  
     Questioner: No. I do hope, though, that someone who understands will directly 
point to it, for it must actually be there all the time since it is real.  
     Krishnamurti Surely all this is su pposition. You had that  sudden feeling of 
reality when you heard the te mple bell, but that is a memory, as you said, and 
from that you are draw ing a conclusion that it must be  there always for it is real. 
Reality is a peculiar thing; it is there when you are no t looking, but when you do 
look, with greed, what you capture is the sediment of your greed, not reality. 
Reality is a living thing and cannot be captured,  and you cannot sa y it is always 
there. There is a path only to something which is stationary, to a fixed, static 
point. To a living thing whic h is constantly in movement, which has no resting 
place how can there be a guide, a path? The mind is so eager to attain it, to 
grasp it, that it makes it into a dead th ing. So, can you put aside the memory of 
that state which you had? Can you put aside the teacher, the path, the end - put it 
aside so completely that your mind is em pty of all this seeking? At present your 
mind is so occupied with this overwh elming demand that th e very occupation 
becomes a barrier. You are seeking, asking, longing, to walk on  the other shore. 
The other shore implies that th ere is this shore, and from  this shore to get to the 
other shore there is space and time. That is what is holding you and bringing 
about this ache for the other shore. That is the real pr oblem - time that divides, 
space that separates, the time necessary to get there and the space that is the 
distance between this and that. This want s to become that, an d finds it is not 
possible because of the distance and the ti me it takes to cover that distance. In 
this there is not only co mparison but also measurem ent, and a mind that is 
capable of measuring is capable also of illusion. This division  of space and time 
between this and that is the way of th e mind, which is thought. Do you know, 
when there is love space disappears and time disappears? It is only when 
thought and desire come in that there is a gap of ti me to be brid ged. When you

5
see this, this is that. Questioner: But I don't see it. I feel  that what you say is true, 
but it eludes me.  
     Krishnamurti: Sir, you are so impat ient, and that very impatience is its own 
aggressiveness. You are attacking, asserting. You are not quiet to look, to listen, 
to feel deeply. You want to get to th e other shore at any cost and you are 
swimming frantically, not knowing where t he other shore is. Th e other shore may 
be this shore, and so you are swimming away from i t. If I may suggest it: stop 
swimming. This doesn't mean that you sh ould become dull, vegetate and do 
nothing, but rather that you should be passively aware without any choice 
whatsoever and no measurement - then see what happens. Nothing may happen, 
but if you are expecting that bell to ring ag ain, if you are expecting ail that feeling 
and delight to come back, then you are swimming in the opposite direction. To be 
quiet requires great energy; swimming diss ipates that energy. You need all your 
energy for silence of the mind, and it is on ly in emptiness, in complete emptiness, 
that a new thing can be.

6
2nd Conversation 
 Questioner: All so-called religious pe ople have something in common and I 
see this same thing in most of the people who co me to hear you. They are all 
looking for something which they variousl y call nirvana, liberation, enlightenment, 
self-realization, eternity or God. Their goal is defined and held before them in 
various teachings, and each  of these teachings, thes e systems, has its set of 
sacred books, its disciplines, its teachers, its morality, its philosophy, its promises 
and threats - a straight and narrow path  excluding the rest of the world and 
promising at its end some heaven or other. Most of these seekers move from one 
system to another, substituti ng the latest teaching for the one they have recently 
dropped. They move from on e emotional orgy to anothe r, not thinking that the 
same process is at work in all this seek ing. Some of them remain in one system 
with one group and refuse to budge. Ot hers eventually believe that they have 
realized whatever it is they  wanted to realize, and then  they spend their days in 
some withdrawn beatitude attr acting in their turn a gr oup of disciples who start 
the whole cycle over again. In all this there is th e compulsive greed to attain 
some realization and, usually , the bitter disappointment and frustration of failure. 
All this seems to me very  unhealthy. These people sa crifice ordinary living for 
some imaginary goal and a mo st unpleasant feeling eman ates from this kind of 
milieu: fanaticism, hysteria, violence and stupidity. One is surprised to find among 
them certain good writers who otherwise  seem quite sane. All this is called 
religion. The whole thing stinks to high heaven. This is the incense of piety. I have 
observed it everywhere. This search fo r enlightenment causes great havoc, and 
people are sacrificed in its wake. Now I would like to ask you, is there in fact any 
such thing as enlightenment, and if so, what is it?  
     Krishnamurti: If it is an escape from  everyday living, everyday living being the 
extraordinary movement of relationship, then this so-called realization, this so-
called enlightenment, or whatever name you like to give it, is illusion and

7
hypocrisy. Anything that d enies love and the understa nding of life and action is 
bound to create a great deal of mischie f. It distorts the mind, and life is made a 
horrible affair. So if we take that to be axiomatic then perhaps we may proceed to 
find out if enlightenment - whatever that may mean - can be found in the very act 
of living. After all, living is more important than any idea, ideal go al or principle. It 
is because we don't know what  living is that we invent these visionary, unrealistic 
concepts which offer es cape. The real question is, ca n one find enlightenment in 
living, in the everyday activi ties of life, or is it only  for the few who are endowed 
with some extraordinary capacity to discover this beatitude? Enlightenment 
means to be a light unto oneself, but a light which is not self-projected or 
imagined, which is not some personal id iosyncrasy. A fter all, this has always 
been the teaching of true religion, though not of organized belief and fear.  
     Questioner: You say the teaching of true religion! This immediately creates the 
camp of the professionals an d specialists versus the rest of the world. Do you 
mean, then, that religion is separate fr om life? Krishnamurti: Religion is not 
separate from life; on the contrary it is lif e itself. It is this division between religion 
and life which has bred all the misery yo u are talking about. So  we come back to 
the basic question of whether it is possible in daily life to live in a state which, for 
the moment, let us call enlightenment?  
     Questioner: I still don't know what you mean by enlightenment?  
     Krishnamurti: A state of negation. Negation is the most positive action, not 
positive assertion. This is  a very important thing to understand. Most of us so 
easily accept positive dogma, a positive creed, because we want to be secure, to 
belong, to be attached, to depend. The positive attitude  divides and brings about 
duality. The conflict then  begins between this atti tude and others. But the 
negation of all values, of all morality, of all beliefs, having  no frontiers, cannot be 
in opposition to anything. A positive statement in its very definition separates, and 
separation is resistance. To this we are accustomed, this is our conditioning. To

8
deny all this is not immoral;  on the contrary to deny all division and resistance is 
the highest morality. To negate everything that man has invent ed, to negate all 
his values, ethics and gods, is to be in a state of mind in which there is no duality, 
therefore no resistance or conflict between opposites. In  this state there are no 
opposites, and this state is not the opposite of something else.  
     Questioner: Then how do you know what is good and what is bad? Or is there 
no good and bad? What is to prevent me from crime or even murder? If I have no 
standards what is to prevent me from God knows what aberrations?  
     Krishnamurti: To deny all this is to deny oneself, and oneself is the conditioned 
entity who continually pursues a conditioned good. To most of us negation 
appears as a vacuum becaus e we know activity only  in the prison of our 
conditioning, fear and misery. From that we  look at negation and imagine it to be 
some terrible state of oblivion or emptiness. To the man who has negated all the 
assertions of society, religion, culture and morality, the man who is still in the 
prison of social conformi ty is a man of sorrow. Ne gation is the state of 
enlightenment which functions in all the activities of a man who is free of the past. 
It is the past, with its tradit ion and its authority, that ha s to be negated. Negation 
is freedom, and it is the fr ee man who lives, loves, an d knows what it means to 
die.  
     Questioner: That much is clear; but you say nothing about any intimation of 
the transcendental, the divine, or whatever you like to call it.  
     Krishnamurti: The intimation of t hat can be found only in freedom, and any 
statement about it is the denial of fr eedom; any statement about it becomes a 
verbal communication without meaning. It is  there, but it cannot be found or 
invited, least of all imprisoned in any system, or ambushed by any clever tricks of 
the mind. It is not in the churches or the temples or the mosques. There is no 
path to it, no guru, no system that can reveal its beauty; its ecstasy comes only 
when there is love. This is enlightenment.

9
     Questioner: Does it bring any new un derstanding of the nature of the universe 
or of consciousness or being? All the religious texts are full of that sort of thing.  
     Krishnamurti: It is like asking ques tions about the other shore while living and 
suffering on this shore. When you are on  the other shore you are everything and 
nothing, and you never ask su ch questions. All such qu estions are of this shore 
and really have no meanin g at all. Begin to live an d you will be there without 
asking, without seeking, without fear.

10
3rd Conversation 
 Questioner: I see the importance of ending fear, sorrow, anger and all the 
travail of man. I see that one must lay the foundations of good behaviour, which is 
generally called righteousness,  and that in that there is no hatred or envy and 
none of the brutality in whic h man exists. I see also that  there must be freedom - 
not from any particular thing but freedom in itself - and that one must not be 
always in the prison of one's own demands and desires. I see all this very clearly 
and I try - though perhaps you may not like the word try - to live in the light of this 
understanding. I have to some extent gone deeply into myself. I am not held by 
any of the things of this world, nor by  any religion. Now I would like to ask: 
granted that one is free, not only outwardly but inward ly, of all the misery and 
confusion of life, what is there beyond the wall? When I say the wall, I mean fear, 
sorrow and the constant pres sure of thought. What is there that can be seen 
when the mind is quiet, not committed to any particular activity?  
     Krishnamurti: What do you mean wh en you say: what is  there? Do you mean 
something to be perceived, to be felt, to be experienced, or to be understood? 
Are you asking by any chance  what is enlightenment? Or  are you asking what is 
there when the mind has stopped all its wanderings and has come to quietness? 
Are you asking what there is on the other side when the mind is really still?  
     Questioner: I'm asking all these th ings. When the mind is still there seems to 
be nothing. There must be so mething tremendously important to discover behind 
all thought. The Buddha and one or two others have talked about something so 
immense that they can't put it into word s. The Buddha said, '`Don't measure with 
words the immeasurable." Everyone ha s known moments wh en the mind was 
perfectly still, and there was really nothing so very great about it; it was just 
emptiness. And yet on e has a feeling that there is  something just around the 
corner which, once discovered transforms  the whole of life. It would seem, from 
what people have said, that a still mind is  necessary to discover this. Also, I see

11
that only an uncluttered, still mind can be efficient and truly perceptive. But there 
must be something much more  than simply an unclutte red, still mind - something 
much more than a fresh mind, an innocent mind, more even than a loving mind.  
     Krishnamurti: So what is the ques tion now? You have stated that a quiet, 
sensitive, alert mind is nece ssary, not only to be efficient, but also to perceive 
things around you and in yourself. Ques tioner: All the philosophers and scientists 
are perceiving something all the time. Some  of them are remarkably bright, many 
of them are even righteous.  But when you've looked through everything they've 
perceived or created or expressed, it's really not very much, and there is certainly 
no intimation of anything divine.  
     Krishnamurti: Are you asking if th ere is something sacred beyond all this? Are 
you asking if there is a different di mension in which the mind can live and 
perceive something that is not merely the intellectual formulation of cunning? Are 
you asking in a roundabout way if there is or is not something supreme?  
     Questioner: A great many people have  said in the most convincing way that 
there is a tremendous treasure which is the source of consciousness. They all 
agree that it cannot be described. They di sagree about how to perceive it. They 
all seem to think that thought  must stop before it can ma nifest itself. Some say it 
is the very matter from wh ich thought is made, and so  on and so on. All agree 
that you are not really living unless you have discovered it. Apparently you 
yourself say more or less the same thin g. Now I'm not following any system or 
discipline or guru or belief. I don't need any of these things to tell me there is 
something transcendental. When you look at a leaf or at a face, you realize that 
there is something far greater than the sci entific or biological explanations of 
existence. It seems that you have drunk at this source. We listen to what you say. 
You carefully show the triviality and the limitation of thought. We listen, we reflect, 
and we do come upon a new stillness. Conflict does end. But what then?  
     Krishnamurti: Why are you asking this?

12
     Questioner: You're asking a blind man why he wants to see.  
     Krishnamurti: The question wasn't asked as a clever gamb it, or in order to 
point out that a silent mind doesn't ask anything at all, but to find out whether you 
are really searching for something transcendental. If you are, what is the motive 
behind that search - curiosity, an urgency to discover, or the desire to see such 
beauty as you have never seen  before? Isn't it important for you to find out for 
yourself whether you are as king for the more, or whether you are trying to see 
exactly what is? The two are incompatible. If you can put aside the more, then we 
are concerned only with what is when th e mind is silent. Wh at actually takes 
place when the mind is really quiet? That is  the real question, isn't it - not what is 
transcendental or what lies beyond?  
     Questioner: What lies beyond is my question.  
     Krishnamurti: What lies beyond can be found only if the mind is still. There 
may be something or there may be nothing at all. So the only thing that is 
important is for the mind to be still. Ag ain, if you are concerned with what lies 
beyond, then you are not looking at what the state of actual stillness is. If stillness 
to you is only a door to that which lies beyond, then you are not concerned with 
that door, whereas what is important is the very door itself, the very stillness itself. 
Therefore you cannot ask what lies beyond. The only thing that is important is for 
the mind to be still. Then what takes place? That is all we are concerned with, not 
with what lies beyond silence.  
     Questioner: You are right. The silenc e has no importance to me except as a 
doorway.  
     Krishnamurti: How do you know it is a doorway and not the thing itself? The 
means is the end, they are not two separate things. Silence is the only fact, not 
what you discover through it. Let us remain with the fact and see what that fact is. 
It is of great importance, perhaps of the greatest importance, that this silence be

13
silence in itself and not something induc ed as a means to an end, not something 
induced through drugs, discipline or the repetition of words.  
     Questioner: The silence comes of its own, without a motive and without a 
cause.  
     Krishnamurti: But you are using it as a means.  
     Questioner: No, I have known silence and I see that nothing happens.  
     Krishnamurti: That is the whole poin t. There is no other fact but silence which 
has not been invited, induced, sought a fter, but which is the natural outcome of 
observation and of understa nding oneself and the world about one. In this there 
has been no motive which has brought silence. If t here is any shadow or 
suspicion of a motive, then that silence is  directed and deliberate, so it is not 
silence at all. If you can hone stly say that that silence is free, then what actually 
takes place in that silence is our only co ncern. What is the quality and the texture 
of that silence? Is it superf icial, passing, measurable? Ar e you aware of it after it 
is over, or during the silence? If you are aware that you have be en silent, then it 
is only a memory, and theref ore dead. If you are aware of  the silence while it is 
happening, then is it silence? If there is  no observer - that  is, no bundle of 
memories - then is it silence? Is it so mething intermittent which comes and goes 
according to your body chem istry? Does it come when you are alone, or with 
people, or when you are trying to meditate ? What we are trying to find out is the 
nature of this silence. Is it rich or poor? (I don't mean rich with experience, or poor 
because it is uneducated.) Is it  full or shallow? Is it inno cent or is it put together? 
A mind can look at a fact and not see t he beauty, the depth, the quality of that 
fact. Is it possible to observe silence without the observer? When there is silence, 
there is only silence, and no thing else. Then in that si lence what takes place? Is 
this what you are asking?  
     Questioner: Yes.

14
     Krishnamurti: Is there an observation of silence by silence in silence?  
     Questioner: That's a new question.  
     Krishnamurti: It is not a new question if you have been following. The whole 
brain, the mind, the feelings , the body, everything is quiet. Can this quietness, 
stillness, look at itself, no t as an observer who is still?  Can the totality of this 
silence watch its. own totality? The silence becomes aware of itself - in this there 
is no division between an obse rver and an observed. That  is the main point. The 
silence does not use itself to discover so mething beyond itself. There is only that 
silence. Now see what happens.

15
4th Conversation 
 Questioner: I have got one predominating habit; I have other habits, but they 
are of less importance. I have been fi ghting this one habit as long as I can 
remember. It must have been  formed in early childhood . Nobody seemed to care 
enough to correct it then an d gradually as I grew older it became more and more 
deep-rooted. It disappears sometimes only to come back again. I don't seem able 
to get rid of it. I would like to be comple tely master of it. It has become a mania 
with me to overcome it. What am I to do?  
     Krishnamurti: From what you say yo u have fallen into a habit for many, many 
years and you have cultivated another habit, the habit of fighting it. So you want 
to get rid of one habit by cultivating another which is the denial of the first. You 
are fighting one habit with another. When  you can't get rid of  the first habit you 
feel guilty, ashamed, depressed, perhaps angry with yourself for your weakness. 
The one habit and the other are the two sides of the same coin: without the first, 
the second wouldn't be, so th e second is really a contin uation of the first as a 
reaction. So now you have two problems whereas in th e beginning you had only 
one.  
     Questioner: I know what you are going to say because I know what you say 
about awareness, but I can't be aware all the time.  
     Krishnamurti: So now you have several things going on at th e same time: first 
of all the original habit, then , the desire to get rid of it, then the frustration of 
having failed, then the resolve to be aware all the time. This network has arisen 
because deeply you want to get rid of that one habit; th at is your one drive, and 
you are all the time balancing between the habit and the fighting of it. You don't 
see that the real problem is having habits, good or bad, not just one particular 
habit. So the question really is, is it possible  to break a habit without any effort, 
without cultivating its opposite, withou t suppressing it th rough uninterrupted

16
vigilance which is resistance? Uninterrup ted vigilance is simply another habit 
since it is generated by th e habit it is trying to overcome. Questio ner: You mean, 
can I get rid of the habit without generati ng this complicated network of reactions 
to it?  
     Krishnamurti: So long as you want to get rid of i t, that complicated network of 
reactions is actually in oper ation. The wanting to get rid of it is that reactionary 
network. So really you have not stopped this futile reaction to the habit.  
     Questioner: But all the same, I must do something about it!  
     Krishnamurti: That indicates that you are dominated by th is one desire. This 
desire and its reactions are not different  from the habit, and they feed on each 
other. The desire to be superior is not different from being inferior, so the superior 
is the inferior. The saint is the sinner. Qu estioner: Should I, th en, just do nothing 
about it at all?  
     Krishnamurti: What you are doing ab out it is to cultivate another habit in 
opposition to the old one.  
     Questioner: So if I do nothing, I am  left with the habit, an d we are back where 
we started.  
     Krishnamurti: Are we though? Knowi ng that what you do to break the habit is 
the cultivation of another habit, there c an be only one action, which is to do 
nothing at all against that habit. Whatever you do is in the pattern  of habits, so to 
do nothing, to have the feeling that you don't have to fight it, is the greatest action 
of intelligence. If you do anyt hing positive you are back  in the field of habits. 
Seeing this very clearly there is immedi ately a feeling of great relief and great 
lightness. You now see that fighting one habit by cultivating another does not end 
the first habit so you stop fighting it.  
     Questioner: Then only the habit remains, and there is no resistance to it.

17
     Krishnamurti: Any form of resist ance feeds the habit, which does not mean 
that you go on with the habit. You become aware of  the habit and of the 
cultivation of its opposite , which is also a habit, an d this awareness shows you 
that whatever you do with regard to the habit is the formation of another habit. So 
now, after having observed this whole process, your intelligence says, don't do 
anything about the habit. Don' t give any attention to it. Don't be concerned with it 
because the more you are concerned with it the mo re active it becomes. Now 
intelligence is in operation and is watching. This watching is entirely different from 
the vigilance of resisting the habit, reacti ng to it. If you get the feeling of this 
intelligence watching, then this feeling will operate an d deal with the habit, and 
not the vigilance of resoluti on and will. So what is important is not habit but the 
understanding of habit whic h brings about intelligence . This intelligence keeps 
awake without the fuel of de sire, which is will. In the first instance the habit is 
confronted with resistance, in  t h e  s e c o n d  i t  i s  n o t  c o n f r onted at all, and that is 
intelligence. The action of in telligence has withered the resistance to the habit on 
which the habit feeds.  
     Questioner: Do you mean to say that I have got rid of my habit?  
     Krishnamurti: Go slowly, don't be to o hasty in your assump tion of having got 
rid of it. What is more important than habit is this understanding, which is 
intelligence. This intelligence is sacred and therefor e must be touched with clean 
hands, not exploited for trivial little games.  Your little habit is utterly unimportant. 
If intelligence is there the habit is trivial; if  intelligence is not there, then the wheel 
of habit is all you have got.

18
5th Conversation 
 Questioner: I find I get dreadfully atta ched to people and dependent on them. 
In my relationships this a ttachment develops into a sort of possessive demand 
which brings about a feeling of domina tion. Being dependent, and seeing the 
discomfort and pain of it, I try to be de tached. Then I feel terribly lonely, and 
unable to face the loneliness I escape from it through drink and in other ways. Yet 
I don't want to have merely superficial and casual relationships. Krishnamurti: 
There is attachment, then the struggle to  be detached, then out of this comes 
deeper conflict, the fear of loneliness. So wh at is your problem, what is it you are 
trying to find out, to learn? Whether all relationship is a ma tter of dependence? 
You are dependent on environment and people . Is it possible to be free, not only 
of environment and people, but to be free in yourself, so that you don't depend on 
anything or anyone? Can there be joy which is not the outcome of environment or 
of people? The environment changes, people change, and if you depend on them 
you are caught by them, or else you become indifferent, callous, cynical, hard. So 
is it not a matter of whether you can live a life of freedom and joy which is not the 
result of environment, human or otherwise? This is a very important question. 
Most human beings are slaves to their fam ily or to their circ umstances, and they 
want to change the circumstances and the people, hoping thereby to find joy, to 
live freely and more openly. But even if they do create their own environment or 
choose their own relationships, they so on come to depend again on the new 
environment and the new frie nds. Does dependence in any form bring joy? This 
dependence is also the urge to express, the urge to be something. The man who 
has a certain gift or capaci ty depends on it, and when  it diminishes or goes 
altogether he is at a loss and beco mes miserable and ugly. So to depend 
psychologically on anything - people, possessions, ideas, talent - is to invite 
sorrow. Therefore one asks: Is there a jo y that is not dependent on anything? Is 
there a light that is not lit by another?

19
     Questioner: My joy so far has al ways been lit by something or someone 
external to myself so I can't answer that question. Perhaps I don't even dare to 
ask it because then I may have to change my way of  life. I certainly depend on 
drink, books, sex and companionship.  
     Krishnamurti: But when you see for yourself, clearly, that this dependence 
breeds various forms of fear and misery, don't you inevitably ask the other 
question, which is not how to be free of environment and people but, rather, 
whether there is a joy, a bliss, that is its own light?  
     Questioner: I may ask it but it has no value. Being caught in all this, this is all 
that actually exists for me. Krishnam urti: What you are concerned with is 
dependence, with all its imp lications, which is a fact. Th en there is a deeper fact, 
which is loneliness, the fe eling of being isolated. Feeling lonely, we attach 
ourselves to people, drink, and all sort s of other escapes. Attachment is an 
escape from loneliness. Can this loneliness be underst ood and can one find out 
for oneself what is beyond it? That is the real question, not what to do about 
attachment to people or environment.  Can this deep se nse of loneliness, 
emptiness, be transcende d? Any movement at all away from loneliness 
strengthens the loneliness, and so there is more need than ev er before to get 
away from it. this makes for attachme nt which brings its own problems. The 
problems of attachment occupy the mind so much that  one loses sight of the 
loneliness and disregards it. So we di sregard the cause and occupy ourselves 
with the effect. But the lo neliness is acting all the time because there is no 
difference between cause and effect. Ther e is only what is. It becomes a cause 
only when it moves away from itself. It is important to unde rstand that this 
movement away from itself is itself, and therefore it is its own effect. There is, 
therefore, no cause and effect at all, no movement anywhere at all, but only what 
is. You don't see what is be cause you cling to the effec t. There is loneliness, and 
apparent movement away from this lo neliness to attachment; then this 
attachment with all its complications becomes so important, so dominating, that it

20
prevents one from looking at  what is. Movement away fr om what is, is fear, and 
we try to resolve it by another escape. Th is is perpetual motion, apparently away 
from what is, but in actuality there is no  movement at all. So it is only the mind 
which sees what is and doesn't move away fr om it in any directio n that is free of 
what is. Since this chain of cause and effect is the action of loneliness, it is clear 
that the only ending of loneliness is the ending of this action.  
     Questioner: I shall have to go into this very, very deeply.  
     Krishnamurti: But this also ca n become an occupation  which becomes an 
escape. If you see all th is with complete clarity it is like the flight of the eagle that 
leaves no mark in the air.

21
6th Conversation 
 Questioner: I have come to you to find out why there is a division, a 
separation, between onesel f and everything else, even  between one's wife and 
children and oneself. Wherever one goes, one finds this separation - not only in 
oneself but in everyone else. People talk a great deal about unity and 
brotherhood but I wonder if it is ever possib le to be really free of this division, this 
aching separation? I can pretend, intellectually, that there is no  real separation; I 
can explain to myself the causes of th ese divisions - not only between man and 
man but between theories, theologies and governments - but I know, actually in 
myself, that there is this insoluble divisi on, this wide gulf that separates me from 
another. I always feel I'm standing on this bank and that  everybody else is on the 
other bank, and there are these deep wa ters between us. T hat's my problem - 
why is there this gap of separation?  
     Krishnamurti: You have forgotten to mention the difference, the contradiction, 
the gap, between one thought and another, between one feeling and another, the 
contradiction between actions, the divisi on between life and death, the endless 
corridor of opposites. After stating all th is, our question is: why is there this 
division, this cleavage betw een what is and what has been or  what should be? 
We are asking why man has liv ed in this dualistic stat e, why he has broken life 
into various fragments? Are we asking to find the cause or are we trying to go 
beyond the cause and the effect? Is it an analytic al process or a perception, an 
understanding of a state of  mind in which division no longer exists? To 
understand such a stat e of mind we must look at the beginning of thought. We 
must be aware of thought as it arises and must also be awar e of that which it 
comes out of. Thought arises from the pa st. The past is th ought. When we say 
we must be aware of though t as it arises, we mean we must be aware of the 
actual meaning of thought, not simply the fa ct that thinking is taking place. It is 
the meaning of thought which is the pa st. There is no thought without its

22
meaning. A thought is like a th read in a piece of cloth. Most of us are unaware of 
the whole cloth, which is th e whole mind, and are trying to control, or shape, or 
understand, the meaning of one thread, which is a th ought. On what is the whole 
cloth of thoughts resting? Is it lying on any substance? If so, what is that 
substance? Is it lying on deeper thought or on nothin g at all? And what is the 
material of this cloth?  
     Questioner: You are asking too ma ny questions. None of this has ever 
occurred to me before, so I must go rather slowly.  
     Krishnamurti: Is thought the cause of  all division, of all fragmentation in life? 
What is thought made of? What is the substance of those pieces of thread woven 
into that complex cloth we call the mind? Thought is matter, probably 
measurable. And it comes from the accumulated memory, which is matter, stored 
in the brain. Thought has its origin in the past, recent or remote. Can one be 
aware of thought as it arises out of the past - the recollections of the past, the 
action of the past? And can one be aware beyond the past, behind the wall of the 
past? This doesn't mean still further back in  time, it means the space that is not 
touched by time or memory. Until we discov er this the mind cannot see itself in 
terms of anything other than thought, which is time. You cannot  look at thought 
with thought, and you cannot look at time with time. So whatever thought does, or 
whatever it negates, is still within its own measurable boundaries.  
     To answer all the questions we ha ve put, we must put ye t a further question: 
what is the thinker? Is the thinker sepa rate from thought? Is the experiencer 
different from the thing he experiences? Is the observer diffe rent from the thing 
he observes? If the observer is different from the thing he ob serves, then there 
will always be division, se paration, and therefore conflict. To go beyond this 
cleavage we must understan d what the observer is. Obviously he makes this 
division. You who ar e observing make this divisi on, whether it be between you 
and your wife, or the tree, or  anything else. Now what is this observer, or thinker,

23
or experiencer? The observer is the livin g entity who is al ways moving, acting, 
who is aware of things, and aware of hi s own existence. This existence he is 
aware of is his relationship to things, to people and to ideas. This observer is the 
whole machinery of thought, he  is also observation, he  is also a nervous system 
and sensory perception. The observer is  his name, his conditioning, and the 
relationship between that conditioning and lif e. All this is the ob server. He is also 
his own idea of himself - an  image again built from co nditioning, from the past, 
from tradition. The observer thinks and ac ts. His action is always according to his 
image about himself and his image of the wo rld. This action of the observer in 
relationship breeds division. This acti on is the only relationship we know. This 
action is not separate from the observer , it is the observer himself. It is the 
observer who talks about th e world and himself in rela tionship, and fails to see 
that his relationship is his own action, therefore himself. So the cause of all the 
division is the action of the observer. The observer himself is the action which 
divides life into the thing ob served and himself separate from it. Here is the basic 
cause of division, and hence conflict.  
     The division in our lives is the stru cture of thought, which is the action of the 
observer who thinks himself separate. He furthe r thinks of himsel f as the thinker, 
as something different from his thought. But t here can be no thought without the 
thinker and no thinker without the thought. So the two are really one. He is also 
the experiencer and, again, he separates himself from the thing he experiences. 
The observer, the thinker, the experiencer, are not diffe rent from the observed, 
the thought, the experienced. This is not a verbal conclusion. If it is a conclusion 
then it is another thought which again ma kes the division between the conclusion 
and the action which is su pposed to follow that conc lusion. When the mind sees 
the reality of this, the division can no long er exist. This is the whole point of what 
we are saying. All conflict is this battl e between the observer and the observed. 
This is the greatest thing to understand.  Only now can we answer our questions; 
only now can we go beyond  the wall of time and me mory, which is  thought,

24
because only now has thought come to an end. It is only now that thought cannot 
breed division. Thought which can function to communicate, to act, to work, is 
another kind of thought which does not breed division in relationship. 
Righteousness is living without the separative action of the observer.  
     Questioner: What then, where then, is that thing on which the cloth of thought 
exists?  
     Krishnamurti: It is that which is not the action of the obse rver. The realizing of 
this is great love. This realization is po ssible only when you understand that the 
observer himself is the observed: and that is meditation.

25
7th Conversation 
 Questioner: I am in conflic t over so many things, not only outwardly but also 
inwardly. I can somehow deal with the outward conflicts but I want to know how I 
can end the conflict, the battle, which is go ing on within myself most of the time. I 
want to be finished with it. I want somehow to be free from all this strife. What am 
I to do? Sometimes it seems to me that co nflict is inevitable. I see it in the 
struggle for survival, the big living on the little, the great intellect dominating 
smaller intellects, one belie f suppressing, supplanting an other, one nation ruling 
another, and so on, en dlessly. I see this and accept  it, but it doesn't somehow 
seem right; it doesn't seem to  have any quality of love, and I feel that if I could 
end this strife in myself, out of that endi ng might come love. But l`m so uncertain, 
so confused, about the whole thing. All the great teache rs have main tained that 
one must strive, that the wa y to find truth, or God, is  through discipline, control 
and sacrifice. In one form or another th is battle is sanctified. And now you say 
that conflict is the very root  of disorder. How am I to kn ow what is the truth about 
conflict?  
     Krishnamurti: Conflict in any form di storts the mind. This is a fact, not some 
opinion or judgment given thoughtlessly. Any conf lict between two people 
prevents their understanding each ot her. Conflict prevents  perception. The 
understanding of what is, is  the only important thing, not the formulating of what 
should be. This division between what is and what should be is the origin of 
conflict. And the interval between idea and action also breeds conflict. The fact 
and the image are two different things: th e pursuit of the image leads to every 
form of conflict, illusion and hypocrisy whereas the understa nding of what is, 
which is the only thing we really have, leads to quite a different state of mind.  
     Contradictory drives bring about conflict; one will opposi ng another form of 
desire is conflict. Memory of what has be en, opposed to what is, is conflict; and 
this is time. Becoming, ac hieving, is conflict, and this is time. Imitation,

26
conformity, obedience, taking a vow, regretting, suppressing - all this brings more 
or less conflict. The very structure of the brain which demands security,safety 
which is aware of danger, is  the source of conflict. There is no such thing as 
security or permanency. So our whole being, our relationships, activities, 
thoughts, our way of life, en gender struggle, conflict, strife. And now you ask me 
how this is to end. The saint, the monk  and the sannyasi try to escape from 
conflict, but they are still in  conflict. As we know, all relationship is conflict - 
conflict between the image and the reality.  There is no relationship between two 
people, not even between the two images th ey have of each ot her. Each lives in 
his own isolation, and the relationship is merely looking over the wall. So 
wherever one looks, superficially or very, very deeply, there is this agony of strife 
and pain. The whole field of the mind - in its aspirations, in its desire to change, in 
its acceptance of what is a nd its wanting to go beyond it; all this is itself conflict. 
So the mind itself is conflict, thought is conflict, and when thought says, "I will not 
think", this also is conflict. All activity of the mind an d of the feelings, which are 
part of the mind, is conflict. When you ask how you can end conflict you are really 
asking how you can stop thinking, how your mind can be drugged to be quiet?  
     Questioner: But I don't want a drugged , stupid mind. I want it to be highly 
active energetic and passionate must it be either drugged or in conflict?  
     Krishnamurti: You want it to be active, energetic, passionate, and yet you want 
to end conflict?  
     Questioner: Precisely, for when th ere is conflict it is neither active nor 
passionate. When there is conflict it is as if the mind were wounded by its own 
activity and loses sensitivity.  
     Krishnamurti: So it becomes clea r that conflict destro ys passion, energy and 
sensitivity.

27
     Questioner: You don't have to convince me. I know it, but it doesn't get me any 
further.  
     Krishnamurti: What do you mean by knowing?  
     Questioner: I mean that the truth of what you have said is  apparent. But this 
gets one no further. Krishnamur ti: Do you see the truth of  it, or do you see the 
verbal structure of it - the actual fact or  the explanation? We must be very clear 
about this because the explanation is not  the fact, the desc ription is not the 
described; and when you say "l know" it  may be that you perceive only the 
description.  
     Questioner: No.  
     Krishnamurti: Please don't be so quick and impatient. If th e description is not 
the described, then there is only the desc ribed. The described is the fact, this 
fact: passion, sensitivity and energy are lo st when there is conflict. And conflict is 
all thinking and feeling, which is all th e mind. The mind is all like and dislike, 
judgment, prejudice, condemnation, ju stification and so on. And one very 
important activity of the mind is descript ion, in which it gets caught. The mind 
sees its own description and ge ts caught in it and thinks  it sees the fact whereas 
in reality it is caught up  in its own movement. So wh ere are we now, when there 
is only what is and not the description?  
     Questioner: You were saying there is  conflict, which is a ll the actions of the 
mind, and this conflict destro ys the sensitivity and the energy and the passion of 
the mind itself. So the mind dulls itself by conflict, by working against itself.  
     Krishnamurti: So your questio n becomes: how can the mind stop working 
against itself?  
     Questioner: Yes.

28
     Krishnamurti: Is this question one  more condemnation, justification, escape, 
one more of these interfering activities of the mind which makes it work against 
itself? If it is, then it breeds conflict. Is this question trying to get rid of conflict? If it 
is, it is more conflict, and you are forever in this vi cious circle. So the right 
question is not how to end conflict but to see the truth that  where passion and 
sensitivity are, conflict is absent. Do you see this?  
     Questioner: Yes.  
     Krishnamurti: So you can no longer be concerned with the ending of conflict; it 
will wither away. But it will ne ver wither so long as thou ght is nourishing it. What 
is important is the passion and the sensitivity, not the ending of conflict.  
     Questioner: I see this, but that does n't mean I've got the passion; it doesn't 
mean I've ended the conflict.  
     Krishnamurti: If you really see th is, that very act of seeing is passion, 
sensitivity, energy. And in this seeing there is no conflict.

29
8th Conversation 
 Questioner: I left the world, my world of  professional writing, because I wanted 
to lead a spiritual life. I abandoned all my appetites an d ambitions to be famous, 
although I had the necessary talent, and ca me to you hoping to find, to realize, 
the ultimate. I have been under this gr eat banyan tree for five years now and I 
find myself all of a sudden dull, washed out, inwardly lo nely and rather miserable. 
I wake up in the morning to find that I have  not realized anything at all, that I was 
perhaps better off a couple of years ago when I still had some strong religious 
fervour. Now there is no ferv our left and, having sacrificed the things of the world 
to find God, I am without either. I feel like a sucked orange. What is to blame - the 
teachings, you, your environment  - or is it that I have no capacity for this thing, 
that I have not found the crack in the wall that will reveal the sky? Or is it simply 
that this whole quest, from  beginning to end, is a mi rage and that I would have 
been better off never to have thought of re ligion but to have stuck to the tangible, 
everybody fulfilments of my former life? What is wrong, and what am I to do now? 
Shall I leave all this? If so, for what?  
     Krishnamurti: Do you feel that living under this banyan tree, or any other tree, 
is destroying you, preventing you fr om understanding, seeing? Is this 
environment destroying you? If you leave this world and go  back to what you did 
before - the world of writing and all the everyday things of life - will you not be 
destroyed, dulled and sucked  dry there also by the things of that life? You see 
this destructive process going on ever ywhere in people wh o pursue success, 
whatever they are doing and for whatev er they are doing and for whatever 
reason. You see it in the do ctor, in the politician, in the scientist, in the artist. 
Does anyone anywhere ever escape this destruction?  
     Questioner: Yes, I see that everyo ne is sucked dry. They may have fame and 
wealth, but if they look at themselves objectively they have to admit that they are 
actually nothing more than a showy facade of actions, words, formulas, concepts,

30
attitudes, platitudes, ho pes and fears. Underneath there is emptiness and 
confusion, age and the bitterness of failure.  
     Krishnamurti: Do yo u also see that the religiou s people who have supposedly 
abandoned the world are still really in it because t heir conduct is governed by the 
same ambitions, the same  drive to fulfil, to become, to realize, to attain, to grasp 
and to keep? The objects of this drive are called spiritual and seem to be different 
from the objects of the drive in the world,  but they are not different at all because 
the drive is exactly the sa me movement. These religious  people also are caught 
in formulas, ideals, imagination, hopes, vague certainties, which are only beliefs - 
and they also become old, ugly and hollow. So the world A which they have left is 
exactly the same as the world B of the so-called spiritual life. A is B, and B is A. In 
this so-called spiritual world you are destro yed just as you were destroyed in that 
other everyday world.  
     Do you think that this dying, this destruction, comes from your environment, or 
from yourself? Does it come from another or from you? Is it something that is 
done to you or something that you are doing?  
     Questioner: I thought that this dyin g, this destruction, was the result of my 
environment, but now that you have poi nted out how it takes place in all 
environments, everywhere and cont inues even when you change the 
environment from A to B, or back again fr om B to A, I am beginning to see that 
this destruction is not the result of environment. This dying is self-destruction. It is 
something which I do to myself. It is I who do it, I who am  responsible, and it has 
nothing to do with people or environment.  
     Krishnamurti: This is the most im portant point to realiz e. This destruction 
comes from yourself and from nobod y and nothing else, not from your 
environment, not from people, not from  events or circumstances. You are 
responsible for your own de struction and misery, your own loneliness, your own 
moods, your own empty hollowness. When  you realize this you either become

31
bitter or insensitive to it all, pretending that all is well; or you become neurotic, 
vacillating between A and B, thinking that there is some difference between them, 
or you take to drink or drugs like so many people have done.  
     Questioner: I understand this now.  
     Krishnamurti: In that case you will abandon all hope of finding a solution by 
simply changing the outer en vironment of your life, by  simply changing from B 
back to A, for you will know  that A and B are the same ; in both of them is the 
desire to achieve, to attain, to gain t he ultimate pleasure, whether in so-called 
enlightenment, God, truth, love, a fat ban king account or any other form of 
security.  
     Questioner: I see this, but what am  I to do? I am still dying, still destroying 
myself. I feel sucked dry, empty, useless. I have lost all I had and gained nothing 
in return.  
     Krishnamurti: You have not understood then. When you feel and say that, you 
are still walking the same road we have be en talking about - that road of self-
fulfilment in either A or B. That road is the self-killing, that ro ad is the factor of 
dying. Your feeling that you have lost all and gained noth ing in return is to walk 
that road; that road is the destruction; the road itself is its own destination which 
is self-destruction, frustration, loneline ss, immaturity. So t he question now is, 
have you really turned your back on that road?  
     Questioner: How do I know whether I have turned my back on it or not?  
     Krishnamurti: You don't know, but if  you see what that road actually is, not 
only its end but its beginning, which is the same as its en d, then it is  impossible 
for you to to walk on it. You may, knowing the danger of  it, occasionally stray on 
to it in a moment of inattention and then catch yourself on it suddenly - but seeing 
the road and its desolation is the ending of  that road, and this  is the only act. 
Don't say, "I don't understand  it, I must think about it, I must work at it, I must

32
practice awareness, I must find out what it  is to be attentive, I must meditate and 
go into it," but see that every movement of fulfilment, achievement or dependence 
in life is that road. Seeing this is th e abandonment of that road. When you see 
danger you don't make a great fuss trying to make up your mind what to do about 
it. If, in the face of danger, you say, "I mu st meditate about it, become aware of it, 
go into it, understand it," you are lost, it is too late. So what  you have to do is 
simply to see this road, wh at it is, where it leads an d how it feels - and already 
you will be walking in a different direction.  
     This is what we mean when we speak of awareness. We mean to be aware of 
the road and all the significance of th at road, to be aware of the thou, sand 
different movements in life wh ich are on the same road. If you try to see or walk 
on the "other road" you are still on the same old road.  
     Questioner: How can I be sure that I am seeing what to do?  
     Krishnamurti: You can't see what to  do, you can see only what not to do. The 
total negation of that road is the new beginning, the other road. This other road is 
not on the map, nor can it ever be put on any map. Every ma p is a map of the 
wrong road, the old road.