What is  
AdvaitaVedanta?   
 
 
       
Experience and Knowledge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
James Swartz 
2003

2
 
What is Advaita Vedanta? 
 
 
Experience of the Self is Not Enlightenment 
 
Vedanta is not a School of Thought 
 
There is no Advaita Vedanta 
 
You are That 
 
Cause and Effect 
 
The Three States of Experience 
 
The Five Sheaths 
 
Is Experience Out There? 
 
Importance of a Teacher 
 
The Self as Bliss Confusion 
 
Knowledge/Realization Confusion 
 
Multi-path Confusion 
 
Liberation is a Thought-Free Mind? 
 
Elimination of Unconscious Tendencies is Enlightenment? 
 
Stages of Enlightenment ? 
 
The Stages of Enlightenment 
 
Enlightenment as Energy? 
 
The Problem of Language

3
 
What is Advaita Vedanta? 
 
Enlightenment through Understanding 
 
 Western spirituality in the last one hundred and fifty years has seen 
many expressions of the impulse to experience and know something ‘higher’ 
- from the late Victorian New Thought movements through the recent New 
Age with its plethora of quasi-spiritual subcultures.  About thirty-five years 
ago during the psychedelic revolution in America when traditional religious 
and social structures were breaking down a migration of export gurus and 
lamas from India and Buddhist countries imported a raft of metaphysical 
concepts intended to provide a generation of questioning adults with answers 
about the meaning of life.  
 Predictably none of the ideas and pr actices that arrived from the East 
survived the contact with Western culture in their original form, not that the 
form in which they arrived was particularly 'original,’ although they seemed 
quite ancient and authentic to Westerners easily awed by the exotic.  Indeed 
many were hybrids of earlier and purer traditions that had already been 
corrupted in their native habitats.  Two related but separate traditions, Yoga 
and Vedanta, arrived already corrupted.    
 Both claim to be ‘liberation’ philo sophies, equally able to free the soul 
from the suffering that is the hallmark of life in an uncertain world.  Both are 
rooted in the Upanishads, the oldest most authoritative extant texts on the 
nature the cosmos, the individual, and the Divine.   
Yoga promises an experience of oneness of the individual soul with  
God.   To gain this experience certain practices are required which vary 
depending on the person prescribing them.   
 Vedanta contends that human beings  find themselves limited in many 
ways and continually strive to rid themselves of limitation.  People pursue 
wealth, pleasure, and merit because they believe it will free them from all 
manner of physical, temporal and psychological problems.  Vedanta 
presents freedom from limitation as the most desirable goal of human 
life. 
 The Upanishads, 1 the source of Vedanta,2 say that before this creation 
was, the self, limitless being, was.  It further says that this self continues to 
                                                           
1 The Upanishads are the portion of the Vedas that contain the ideas relating to self knowledge.   
2 Vedanta, ‘the knowledge that ends the quest for knowledge’, is a means of self knowledge sourced in the 
Upanishads, Brahma Sutras, and the Bhagavad Gita.

4
exist outside of time and is therefore eternal.  And it states that no action one 
can perform will ‘gain’3 this self, even though it is an ever-present reality... 
because actions are limited while the self is unlimited.  Therefore it is at 
odds with Yoga on this issue.  The discovery that one is the limitless self is 
presented as liberation or enlightenment by Vedanta.  
 
Experience of the Self is Not Enlightenment 
 
One of the erroneous notions about Vedanta, which came about 
through a confusion of its teaching with the doctrines of Yoga, is the idea 
that Vedanta is a way to experience the self.  Vedanta contends that ours is a 
non-dual reality in which everything that exists is the self, including 
everything that seems to be ‘not me,’ meaning everything experienceable.   
If this is true then any and all experience is already the self.  From this 
standpoint the Yoga doctrine that one needs to engage in certain practices  
like arresting the thoughts to produce a ‘self’ experience or ‘enter the state of 
the self’ is unnecessary and, in fact, redundant.  The problem, according to 
Vedanta, is not that discrete experiences of oneness are available or 
unavailable but that the individual does not know that he or she is already 
the self...and as mentioned, that whatever experience is happening is the self.  
So the problem can only be solved by knowing what the self is...and 
knowing that I am it.     
Finally, if this is a non-dual reality4 and enlightenment is the 
experience of oneness with the self, how does one explain the existence of 
the experiencer since experience requires an experiencer and an object of 
experience...an obviously dualistic condition?  The self is not going to be 
experiencing itself because it is itself.   Or if it is, it does not need an agent, 
were an agent capable of experiencing it5...which puts paid to the very idea 
of self experience as an experience unique from any other.  The only other 
candidate for the position is the ego, the individual, and Vedanta says that if 
it exists it is the self already...so its desire to experience itself is merely the 
product of ignorance...and can be profitably dismissed.   
We cannot dismiss the Yoga view completely because untold millions 
of truthful persons have ‘experienced’ the self over tens of thousands of 
years so we need to look for a reasonable explanation for this phenomenon.  
                                                           
3 The ‘gain’ is not an experiential gain, like getting a new ‘state of consciousness,’ but the gain of a 
limitless identity due to the loss of one’s identity as an individual.    
4 This is the Upanishad’s fundamental contention.  
5 An agent, the ego/individual would not be able to ‘experience the self’ because it is a gross manifestation 
of a much subter self.  The subtle can experience the gross but the gross cannot experience the subtle.

5
One possible explanation lies in the imprecise use of language.  It may be 
that ‘the experience of the self’ is actually a shift from the individual’s point 
of view to the self’s...in which case it would be more accurate to say that the 
self experiences the ego, which is how it actually is.  Because the shift is so 
subtle and language evolved in the experiential world, it is ill equipped to 
describe this shift accurately so it is forced to formulate the new vision in 
terms of an ego’s experience of an object. 
Another reasonable explanation for the idea of self experience as 
liberation is the situation where the ego, the subject, experiences the 
reflection of the self in a clear mind, the object, and takes the reflection 
of the self for the self...and declares this experience liberation.6  The 
problem with the idea of enlightenment as self experience is that experience 
changes... so there will be no ‘permanent experience.’  This accounts for the 
‘fallen yogi’ phenomenon where the experience of the self disappears and 
with it the notion that one is one with the Self.  Or, worse...the experience 
disappears but the notion that one is the self is retained leaving a very 
unhappy person since the ‘experience of the self’ is pure pleasure.  
 
Vedanta is not a School of Thought  
 
A second and related misconception is that Vedanta is merely an 
‘intellectual’ appreciation of the Self, not a deep and abiding experience as is 
promised by the samadhis of Yoga and many modern gurus.  According to 
Vedanta any deep and abiding experience would naturally be the Self but so 
would a superficial and transitory experience.  Why?  Because in a non-dual 
reality…which this certainly is…any a nd all experience could only be the 
Self experiencing the Self.  When I brush my teeth it is the Self (apparently) 
brushing the Self.  I say, ‘apparent’ because all experience is apparent, the 
conspiracy between an apparent subject and an apparent object.  It could 
only be apparent because the Self is non-dual unborn consciousness and 
everything is it…so there is not actua lly anything going on at all.  Or as 
Vedanta says, “Nothing ever happens.”  And since Vedanta says that there 
are not two selves…one ego or ‘lower’ se lf and one egoless or ‘higher’ self, 
but only one self with apparent ignorance or apparent knowledge of what it 
is…the idea that an ego, an indivi dual, can somehow ‘experience the non-
dual Self’ as a discrete experience is plainly incorrect.     
The misunderstanding here lies in the idea that there are two kinds of 
knowledge: experiential (no knowledge) and intellectual.  But actually, since 
                                                           
6 This ‘experience of the self’ is the second and necessary stage on the path to enlightement.  A discussion 
of the three stages appears later in this article.

6
all knowledge takes place in the intellect, including the absence of 
knowledge, both knowledge and ignorance are only going to be 
‘intellectual.’  The ‘I’ is never interested in knowledge or no-knowledge 
since it is the illuminator of both…and therefore free of both.  Furthermore, 
if the Self were an experience and the problem of Self recognition was due 
to ignorance of the nature of the Self as Vedanta contends, how could an 
experience erase the ignorance…except temporarily as happens in various 
fleeting samadhis and epiphanies?  And experience, no matter how ‘non-
dual’ it is (and how long it goes on), does not erase thought patterns…as 
evidenced by the fact literally millions of people who have ‘experienced’ 
non-duality continue to think of themselves as limited beings when the 
experience wears off.   If the experience of non-duality were the solution to 
the spiritual search no one who had had it would continue to search for 
‘permanent’ or ‘total’ enlightenment.  The spiritual world today is little more 
than tens of thousands of people who have experienced the Self but who 
remain locked in their concepts of who they are.   
However, analysis of experience, shallow or deep, leading to the 
discovery that any and all experience is nothing but one’s Self, could remove 
the ‘intellectual’ notion that experience was superior to knowledge.  After 
all, someone who strives for the experience of oneness does so because he 
or she holds an ‘intellectual’ conviction that experience is the only path 
to enlightenment.  If he or she is going to dismiss the very reasonable idea 
that you can only get what you already have through understanding that you 
have it, he or she will have to dismiss as merely ‘intellectual’ the much more 
unreasonable notion that the Self is only available through a particular non-
dual experience. 
In fact, Vedanta has no quarrel with experience.  Experience is a 
universal experience.  And the ‘experience of non-duality’ gives a glimpse 
of the Self which can be an aid to understanding.  Vedanta  merely says that 
experience as such is unconscious, incapable of delivering knowledge.  For 
knowledge to happen whether it is based on experience or inference there 
must be a conscious factor other than experience that recognizes 
experience for what it is.  This is why enlightenment is not a permanent 
experience of the Self but is instead the ‘experiential’ (as opposed to 
‘theoretical’) understanding that one is the Self.   
Another corruption of Vedanta exported to the West is the idea that 
Vedanta is a philosophy or school of thought.  A school of thought is always 
the ideas of a given person or persons and is therefore subject to dispute.  If 
an idea is to be accepted as a fact, not merely a belief or an opinion, it needs 
to be verified by a legitimate means of knowledge.  But the subject matter of

7
Vedanta, the Self, is not available by direct perception or inference since it is 
outside time and space, the field in which the senses and mind operate.  And 
because human beings only have three means of knowledge (perception, 
inference and testimony) and these can only be used to know objects, how 
can the Self, the subject (which cannot be objectified) and the one who is 
wielding the means of knowledge, be known through them?  So the subject 
matter of Vedanta, the Self, cannot be a school of thought.   
 Vedanta looks like a school of thought, however, because it is 
comprised of a body of ideas that originated in the Vedas.  People to whom 
the Self had never been revealed through the teachings of Vedanta assumed 
that it was just another philosophy and attributed differing interpretations to 
different teachers and so it became several schools of thought...for them.   
Had these people understood that Vedanta was simply a means for knowing 
the Self, this misconception would not have arisen. 
A means of knowledge is not knowledge. It will not remain once the 
object to be known is known.  So study of its ideas and the retention of them 
as beliefs or opinions is not appropriate to the actual purpose of Vedanta.  
Philosophies like existentialism, on the other hand, are subject to 
modification and remain in the realm of ideas as long as they serve some 
purpose.  Vedanta, a means of knowledge that works, will never be modified 
because it already performs its function perfectly.  Nor will it be forgotten 
because the human mind forever needs to rid itself of its sense of limitation.    
 
 
There is no Advaita Vedanta 
 
The words Advaita Vedanta, like the word Hinduism,7 are a misnomer 
because they imply other Vedantas.  The word ‘Advaita’ means non-dual 
and implies the concept of duality.  Indeed, those who view Vedanta as a 
school of thought speak of Dwaita Vedanta, dualistic Vedanta, 
VishistAdvaita Vedanta, qualified non-dualism, and even Bhakti Vedanta, 
devotional Vedanta.  Or they compare it with philosophies or religions that 
present similar ideas.    
The word ‘Advaita’ is not an adjective meant to modify a particular 
type of Vedanta but a word that describes the nature of the Self.  Keeping in 
mind that words are always symbols, although non-dual implies dual, it is 
more appropriate to refer to the Self as non-dual than as one since one is a 
                                                           
7 The terms Hindu came from the Greeks who described the people living in the Indus Valley as Hindus.  
The ideas and practices that are commonly thought to comprise Hinduism are actually  Sanatana Dharma, 
the Eternal Dharma, which are based on the Vedas.

8
number that implies two, many, and even zero, nothing.  Furthermore, it 
would be inappropriate to label Vedanta, which is merely a means of 
knowledge, as non-dual because it is in fact a dualistic device operating in a 
dualistic situation, one that ironically delivers non-dual knowledge.  
 The ultimate source of Vedanta’ s teachings are the Upanishads, 
documents appended to the concluding portion of each Veda.  In fact the 
word Vedanta is a compound.  Veda means knowledge and anta means end. 
On an exoteric level the term indicates the Upanishads, the texts containing 
its seed teachings, because they are situated at the end of each Veda.  On the 
esoteric level, it means the non-dual knowledge that ends the belief in 
oneself 
as a limited being.  Because of the cryptic nature of the Upanishad  mantras, 
the subtle nature of the subject matter, the Self, and the fact that a single 
Sanskrit word often has many possible meanings, it is possible to interpret 
the statements of the Upanishad differently.  Over the course of time there 
have been a number of great teachers of Vedanta who interpreted the 
statements of the Upanishads in different ways.  But this does not amount to 
different schools of thought because all of them accepted Vedanta as a 
means of Self knowledge.    
Although Vedanta is often erroneously accused of being an 
intellectual discipline, it operates differently from them because it does not 
leave concepts behind in the mind once it has been handled by a teacher.  
It uses concepts to destroy false concepts about the nature of the Self.  And 
in the process both the correct idea and the erroneous idea disappear into the 
vision of oneself as the Self.  Since the emphasis is on removal of doubt, any 
interpretation of a mantra can be applied to remove the doubt, irrespective of 
other interpretations.  For a given person one interpretation may be 
appropriate while the same interpretation may be inappropriate for another 
because he or she entertains a different doubt or formulates the doubt in a 
different way.  Irrespective of the interpretation, Vedanta acts as a means of 
knowledge if it removes one’s ignorance of one’s limitless nature.   
If I want to see an object I need only use my eyes.  If my ears do not 
hear the object while my eyes are seeing it their testimony does not 
invalidate what my eyes see.  If I want to gain the knowledge of my Self I 
need to dispassionately expose myself to the teachings of Vedanta to see 
whether or not what it says is true.  Because they are concerned with a 
different reality, perceptions and inferences about things in the world do not 
in any way invalidate the vision of Vedanta.

9
You are That    
 
 The vision of Vedanta is an equation of the identity between the 
individual and God.  God is defined in Vedanta as everything that is.  This 
vision of non-duality, which Yoga claims to achieve through certain 
disciplines, is not contradicted by direct perception or by inference.  
Although it is erroneously believed that the self can be experienced, it 
cannot.  Why?  Because the experiencing instrument, the ego/mind, can only 
know objects.  What yogis claim to be a direct perception or experience of 
the self is the ego seeing the reflection of the Self in a pure mind and not the 
self, since the Self is subtler than the mind and ego.     
 Vedanta is not a salvation theology that requires an individual to 
change.  According to it, the soul, the individual is perfect and already free.  
So the release of the individual from his or her feeling of limitation is the 
result of understanding that the individual and God share the same nature, 
limitless awareness.   All the other teachings of Vedanta are only meant to 
prove this equation between man and God.  Or, as a great mystic who 
seemed to have the vision of Vedanta once proclaimed, “I and my Father are 
one.”  The ‘God’ Vedanta envisions is not a bearded old man in the heavens.   
 The heart of Vedanta is a nu mber of teaching methods, called 
prakriyas, found in the Upanishads and used by the teachers of the tradition 
to communicate the vision of non-duality.  If a system of philosophy is built 
up out of these teachings it defeats the purpose of Vedanta.       
 Vedanta does not try to prove that th e self exists because the only self 
evident self existent thing in reality is oneself.  Everything that is known is 
known only because the self, the I, is self-evident awareness.  Vedanta  
concentrates only on removing the ignorance that keeps one from 
appreciating oneself as self-evident awareness.  Self knowledge is the most 
valuable knowledge one can gain because it shows that while everything 
depends on you, you depend on nothing.  This realization is called 
liberation.  
 
 
Cause and Effect  
 
The purpose: to show that the self is limitless and that the world is not 
separate from it.

10
In this important teaching God is presented as the cause of the 
universe, “that from which everything comes and that to which it returns” to 
quote the Upanishad.  Additionally, God is presented as eternal awareness, 
what always exists and never changes. The world is seen as an effect of 
which God is the cause.  But the world is of a slightly different order of 
reality from God.  In a famous text, the Vacarambhana Sruti, the universe is 
not said to exist, nor is it said not to exist.  What kind of existence does it 
enjoy then?  According to the scripture it has an apparent and dependent 
existence.  The individual’s body and mind are within the creation and 
therefore enjoy this peculiar status, but the individual itself is eternal 
awareness, non-separate from God, and therefore the reality of 
everything. 
 If the effect is just the cause in a particular form, then the cause and 
the effect are one.  For example, although there are many different 
ornaments made of gold, from the standpoint of the gold they are all the 
same.  If everything in the universe is fashioned by a single cause, limitless 
awareness, then everything in the universe is limitless awareness.  Therefore 
if I know the essence of any one thing it is as good as knowing the essence 
of every other thing.  To know salt water I needn’t drink the seven seas; I 
need only take a sip from one.  The realization, let’s say recognition, I am 
limitless awareness and the whole universe is not separate from me even 
though I am separate from it is the result of this teaching.   This 
recognition of myself as the whole removes my view of myself as limited 
and incomplete and is called liberation from suffering.   
 
The Three States of Experience 
 
The purpose: to point out that the invariable awareness in the three 
universal states of experience is the self.   
 
 
Another important teaching employed in Vedanta8 is an analysis of 
the three states of experience: waking, dream and sleep. In this analysis, 
which is based on experience, the scripture notes that the waker and waking 
world is absent in both dream and sleep. The dreamer and the dream world is 
absent in both waking and sleep. In sleep the dreamer and the waker and 
their respective worlds are absent.  Then it reasons that If the I, the self, is 
real, meaning eternally existent, it cannot relinquish its status at any time.  
                                                           
8 This analysis is found in the Mandukya Upanishad.

11
Yet, experience shows that these three ‘I’s’ appear and disappear.  That most 
of us consider ourselves to be the entities that experience the waking state  
and dream states and that we consider ourselves to be real is incorrect 
according to this analysis because as wakers, dreamers, and sleepers we 
continually relinquish our existential status.    
Furthermore, what is intrinsic to an object should be present in the 
object as long as the object exists.  If it is not present, then it is an incidental 
attribute.  For example, in the case of a crystal assuming the color of a 
nearby object, the color is incidental.  If it were inherent in the crystal it 
would not disappear when the nearby object is removed.   
 If perception, which is a waking and dream state attribute, were native 
to the self it would exist in the deep sleep state.  But the subject-object 
relationship necessary for perception is absent in deep sleep, yet the self 
does not cease to exist.     
 If the self has no attributes is it non-existent?  It cannot be non-
existent because non-existence is a concept requiring a subject, someone 
who knows.  Investigation of the knower leads us to conclude that the 
knower is the self.  And the self’s nature is awareness, a view supported by 
the scripture.  
 Awareness is present in all st ates of experience, although ego 
consciousness, is absent in the deep sleep state.  When scripture describes 
the self as attribute-free it means that the nature of the self is awareness 
because awareness is the only thing free of attributes.  Attributes, such as a 
sense of doership and enjoyership, are incidental because they depend on the 
state in which one finds oneself.  
Is there a world without someone to see it?  No, if that someone is the 
ego, a non-essential attribute of the self.  The existence of the objective 
world does not depend on the existence of any individual but on impersonal 
awareness.  It cannot be said to exist if it is not known to exist.  To say that it 
exists independently of awareness is meaningless.  Because the self is 
awareness it is limitless and the world, which depends on the subject-object 
relationship, is only an apparent reality, neither completely existent, nor 
completely non-existent.   
 
The Five Sheaths 
 
The purpose: to point out the universal errors in self understanding that 
occur at each of the five levels of experience.

12
The non-apprehension of the self as oneself gives rise to five 
misconceptions about its nature.  These misconceptions are called sheaths 
because they apparently hide the self and need to be removed if the self is to 
be apprehended as it is.   
 The most obvious misunderstanding we entertain about ourselves is 
that we are our gross bodies.  The notions that ‘I am mortal,’ ‘I am fat,’ I am 
male/female’ indicate an association of the ‘I’ with the physical.   
Association of the ‘I’ with the physiological systems causes one to say, ‘I 
am hungry,’ ‘I am thirsty,’ when in fact the I, awareness, does not suffer 
these sensations.  The universal statements, “I am happy,’ ‘I am sad,’ show 
that the I is taken to be the emotional body.  When the intellect entertains the 
idea ‘I am a doer,’ ‘I am a knower’ it reinforces the belief in oneself as the 
body or mind.  This idea is untrue because the self is non-dual actionless 
awareness.  Finally, the I is commonly associated with enjoyment, the state 
of feeling good, which motivates endless activities.  The self is not a feel 
good ‘state.’  It needn’t feel good because it is good, in the sense of what is 
always auspicious.  So the sense of enjoyership is also illegitimate.          
 The application of this teaching follo ws a certain type of logic.  First 
the self is introduced as the gross body, a common belief.  Then it is shown 
that there is another subtler body, the feelings and emotions, which also are 
considered to be oneself.  When one’s feelings are hurt one will instinctively 
say, “I was hurt by what she said.”  This ‘self’ negates the previous self 
because for a self to be a self it cannot be two, modern theories of multiple 
personalities notwithstanding.  The word ‘self’ means essence, that which is 
not made up of parts.  Once the belief in oneself as the physical body is 
dropped and one accepts oneself as the emotional body, the teaching brings 
in the intellect ‘self’ which shows up in experience as the concept ‘I am the 
doer’...which is meant to remove the notion that one is only the feelings and 
emotions.  When one can see that he or she thinks of his or herself as a doer 
and understands the limitation inherent in that concept, the idea of the bliss 
body is introduced.  The ‘bliss body’ is responsible for pleasure and its 
companion concept ‘I am an enjoyer.’  The doer will give way to the enjoyer 
in every case because doing is for the sake of enjoying but enjoying is not  
for the sake of doing.  Finally, the self is introduced as the source of bliss.  
Thus by tracing the ‘I’ concept from the gross to the subtle one is led to the 
self, the fundamental ‘I’.  The realization of the whole and complete ‘I’ 
negates all the lesser selves, meaning one lets go of one’s belief in oneself as 
them and embraces the unlimited identity.   
 The teaching works when it becomes clear that the association of the 
‘I’ with these five basic but conflicting concepts is absurd, since we know

13
experientially that we are only one being, a view supported by scripture.  In 
fact one need not rigidly employ this model when inquiring into the self 
because discovery of the association in one’s mind of the ‘I’ with many 
conflicting ideas should be enough to encourage one to abandon all self 
concepts.  The renunciation of limiting self concepts is tantamount to 
‘gaining’ or ‘realizing’ the self exists in the absence of all concepts.     
 One corruption of Vedanta related to this teaching is the idea that the 
‘sheaths’ actually cover the self and therefore a ‘transcendental’ technique 
such as stopping the mind to experientially gain access to the self is 
required.  Even if such techniques work, one would only enjoy an 
experience.  And we know from experience that experience is by nature 
temporary...so no lasting solution to the problem of limitation would result.  
In fact, because experience is temporary, ‘experience of the self’ as 
distinct from everyday experience just produces frustration in the 
experiencer, the ego.  To gain a permanent ‘experience’ of the self, one 
need only see that all experience is the self.  If experience is gained by 
knowledge one need not suffer the anxiety of trying to ‘maintain’ it, a 
common concern of meditators following the path of Yoga.  
 
Is Experience Out There? 
 
 One of the problems with the experiential view of life, as opposed to  
the analytical view, is that experience always seems to be separate from the 
experiencer.  But is it?  If a thousand people experience one man giving a 
lecture in a large auditorium and they experienced him at the point at which 
he was standing, all the minds hovering around experiencing would interfere 
with each other's experience and nobody would experience the man as he 
was.  But experience is completely subjective.  Stimuli from the man enter 
the senses and drop into the mind, causing the mind to take the form of the 
stimuli and this is where our man is located.    
 So how far is the self from experi ence?  Is there a gap, perhaps a 
tunnel down which the self must travel from its world to the world of 
experience?  There is not.  In fact experience is the self taking form like the 
ocean takes the form of waves.  If I’m looking for the self as an object, a 
transcendental experience, for example, or taking the experience of the self 
as an object, I am deluded because whatever experience I’m having is 
nothing but me.  This, however, does not mean that experience in anyway 
invalidates or validates me because it depends on me but I do not 
depend on it.

14
 
Importance of a Teacher 
 
If Vedanta were a philosophical school of thought all that would be 
required to grasp it would be that one memorize the concepts.   Whatever 
ignorance about the nature of oneself was in place before one’s study began 
would remain...with a new layer of ideas sitting on top of it.  But because it 
is a means of knowledge it needs a teacher, someone ‘abiding’9 as the Self 
who can skillfully wield the teachings according to the traditional methods.  
And, like advanced studies in worldly subjects, the person on whom the 
teachings are wielded needs to be qualified or prepared to receive the 
teachings.10  If the teacher does not know who he or she is, or his or her 
‘enlightenment’11 is formulated in terms of experience, then all he or she can 
do is present the Self as an object to be attained and recommend certain 
practices which he or she believes will give the student access to the self.  
Because it is a means of knowledge Vedanta is not a practice that will bring 
about ‘experience of the self,’ nor is it a theory about the existence of 
transcendental ‘state.’  It’s subject matter is awareness and because 
awareness is the content or essence of every experience, Vedanta need only 
reveal the self to grant one permanent self experience...since there is 
nothing more permanent than oneself.  Discrete experiences come and go 
but the ‘I,’ the self, precedes, pervades and succeeds every experience.  The 
‘access’ to the self that Vedanta provides is in terms of the removal of 
ignorance and not in terms of a mechanical technique like arresting the 
mind.            
 You can lead a horse to water bu t you can’t make it drink.  While a 
teacher is necessary because one cannot apply the prakriyas on oneself 
merely by studying the ancient texts, the teacher cannot willy-nilly grant 
enlightenment to any qualified aspirant simply by unfolding the teachings.  
Because ignorance is tenacious the student needs to ‘practice knowledge.’   
The ‘coming down’ or ‘falling back’ that one suffers on experiential paths 
like Yoga also occurs in Vedanta.  Understanding the teaching and seeing 
how the teacher wields it allows the self inquirer to apply the appropriate 
                                                           
9 In fact enlightenment is not an ‘abidance in the self’ since abidance implies a subject and object and 
enlightenment is the knowledge, backed by experience, that ‘I am the Self.’   
10 These qualitfications are: discrimintation, dispassion, calm mind, buring desire for liberation, faith, 
devotion, and perserverance.  
11 Enlightenment formulated in terms of experience is not enlightenment.  It is a preliminary stage usually 
called self-realization.  A discussion of the stages of enlightenment can be found at the end of this 
document.

15
teaching to the mind as needed outside the teaching situation, until every last 
vestige of ignorance is destroyed.   
 
The Self as Bliss Confusion 
 
Because life in this world without the understanding of oneself as 
limitless awareness involves considerable suffering, human beings 
universally want to feel good.  This craving has created the belief that there 
is an experienceable ‘state of permanent bliss,’ ananda, that is available 
through certain practices.  This belief stems from an incorrect understanding 
of the word ‘ananta,’ which is used by the Upanishad to describe the self.  
Ananta is invariably mistranslated as ‘bliss’ when the actual meaning is 
limitlessness.  ‘Anta’ means end and ‘a’ is a negative meaning ‘not’ so the 
word means ‘what doesn’t end.’  So the actual meaning of the word is the 
self, awareness.  
 “The light knows the darkness bu t the darkness does not know the 
light.”  Like all experience, bliss, which is produced when the mind is 
temporarily free of fear and craving, is unconscious.  It does not know the 
self.  But it is known and experienced because the self, awareness, illumines 
it.  The best one can do with the word bliss is to see it as a symbol of the 
self, a statement that the self is full, a partless whole.  When someone who 
has been suffering the changes in the body mind initially wakes up to the 
self, the self seems to ‘feel’ very good.  But the ‘feeling,’ which is an 
interpretation by the mind, is not the presence of a positive self ‘state’ but 
simply the appreciation of the absence of change.  As one abides as the self 
over time and the memory of suffering diminishes, the feeling of bliss 
gradually dissolves into non-dual partless wholeness.  As the self I have no 
need to feel good because I am good, meaning I am the essence of every 
experience.  
 When self realization is touted as  the ‘experience of limitless bliss’ it 
is usually believed that this self bliss is infinitely superior to the transitory 
blisses one encounters in daily life.  But the scripture says that any 
experience of bliss, whether it is born of sensory experience, the discovery 
of some unknown object, or spiritual practices such as Yoga, it is just the 
fullness and limitlessness of the self reflecting in the body/mind.        
     The recognition of this fact re moves the belief in oneself as unhappy, 
limited and mortal.  
 
Knowledge/Realization Confusion

16
 Another ill-considered belief enjoyi ng considerable currency in the 
modern spiritual world is the idea that self knowledge is intellectual and that 
self realization is ‘experiential.’  Because of this confusion it is thought that 
the study of the scripture is merely for knowledge while other practices, like 
the samadhis of Yoga, are for practical, ‘experiential’ enlightenment.   
 This confusion between knowledge and experiential realization is 
caused by not recognizing the invariable presence of the self in all situations.  
If the self is always present and available, the scripture wielded by the self in 
the form of a teacher is the most direct way of ‘experiencing the self’ 
because it reveals the nature of the self.  And if only knowledge sets one 
free because ignorance is the problem, a technique that is meant to give 
‘experience’ of the self would in fact be indirect realization since the 
experience would have to be converted into knowledge for it to last.  The 
absurdity of the experiential view is apparent when we consider that 
whatever experience one is having at any time is the self...but the self is not 
an experience.   
 Knowledge is only direct or indirect.  Direct knowledge arises 
simultaneously with perception.  Indirect knowledge is inference.  I see 
smoke and infer fire.  The derogatory adjective ‘intellectual’ is completely 
unwarranted unless there are other kinds of knowledge like physical, 
emotional, intuitive, etc.  In fact all knowledge is ‘intellectual’ because the 
intellect is the only instrument capable of knowing.  Because it is the 
product of unconscious impersonal forces, a feeling or an intuition is not 
self-knowing.  It becomes known because the self illumines the intellect in 
which feelings and thoughts arise.   
Usage shows that what is actually meant by the word ‘intellectual’ is 
knowledge not backed by experience.  A person can intellectually know 
what love is without ever having been in love.  But the self is not an 
experience like love.  If I exist I am the self so I am not short of self 
experience.  Therefore the need to experience myself is illegitmate and I 
need another way, knowledge, to gain the ‘experience’ that I already have.  
The many seekers of self experience that eventually become 
disillusioned because they are unable to obtain a permanent experience 
of the self need to convert their quest for experience into a quest for 
understanding if they wish to free themselves from bondage to their 
attachment to experience...which prevents them from enlightenment. 
 
Multi-path Confusion

17
The idea that self knowledge can be gained in four different ways is a 
corruption that took place in India long before Vedanta was exported to the 
West.  According to this idea, each path is called a yoga and is different 
from the other three.  Each was meant for a different type of person.  The 
path of devotion was meant to serve the needs of predominately emotional 
persons.  The path of action was intended for extroverted action-oriented 
people, and the path of knowledge was designed for those with an 
intellectual orientation.  And Raja Yoga, the eightfold path, was for a person 
who was anyone who was not one of the other types.   
 That one can gain self knowle dge through action is an obvious 
absurdity because knowledge requires a means and action is not a valid 
means of knowledge.  In fact action to gain something someone already 
has is motivated by ignorance.  Rather than erase one’s ignorance of 
oneself, it will only serve to reinforce the ill-considered belief in oneself as a 
doer of ‘selfless’ action, a devotee of God, or a knower of truth...all egoic 
identities.   
 The Vedas actually only prescribe tw o lifestyles relevant to the quest 
for liberation; that of the householder and that of the renunciate.  The 
renunciate pursues self knowledge exclusively and has no obligatory duties.  
The householder is enjoined to perform action in a certain spirit to prepare 
his or her mind for self knowledge.   
 If someone thinks of his or hers elf as a devotee exclusively, this 
identity is not warranted because devotional practices like pujas, chanting, 
and meditation/prayer are all karmas, activities.  So, in fact this person is 
just a karma yogi, a doer of ritualistic actions.  Additionally, devotion is not 
a quality unique to any individual or path but is found in anyone pursuing a 
spiritual goal.  One does not pursue self knowledge or self experience 
without devotion, for example.  So the idea of devotion as a particular path 
is not found in the Vedas.   
 Although not found in the Vedas proper, the idea of integral yoga 
became associated with Vedanta in the last century primarily through the 
writings of Sri Aurobindo.  According to this view, because the subtle body 
has three inner centers, the mind (emotions/feelings), intellect, and ego 
which are often in conflict, three ‘techniques’ are necessary to fuse it into an 
instrument capable of knowing the self and retaining that knowledge 
permanently.  Devotional practice is meant to be useful in transforming 
gross emotions into devotion for God who is non-separate from the self.  
Action yoga is helpful in identifying ego and wearing away its concept of 
itself as a doer.  And the practice of knowledge trains the mind to think from 
the Self’s point of view, rather than the ego’s, eventually harmonizing the

18
individual with the natural order of things, thus reducing stress and conflict.  
At best this view is helpful in preparing the mind for self knowledge but it 
does not, for the reasons mentioned above, qualify as a valid means of self 
knowledge.      
 
Liberation is a Thought-Free Mind? 
 
One of the most popular and misguided views at the heart of Yoga 
doctrine
12 that became associated with Vedanta is the idea that liberation is 
the elimination of all thoughts in the mind.  This idea came about because 
the scripture describes the self as thought free and because experientially 
many epiphanies occur when the mind is temporarily arrested in the waking 
state.  But if a thought-free mind was liberation everyone would already 
be enlightened...because who has not slept?   Even between two thoughts 
there is a tiny gap, an absence of thought.  If absence of thought for a split 
second is not enlightenment, absence of thought for an hour or two is not 
going to amount to the liberating knowledge ‘I am limitless awareness.’   
Realistically, the idea that no thought is enlightenment means that there is no 
such thing as enlightenment.  Finally, if one is enlightened only when the 
mind is thought-free, what happens to enlightenment when the mind begins 
to think?   The mind is not going to free itself of thought because it is not 
capable of knowing that thought is a problem.  So someone else would have 
to do it.   The only someone capable of removing the thoughts would be the 
self but the self is already free of thoughts so there would be no reason for it 
to destroy the mind.  From its non-dual point of view although the mind is a 
lesser order of reality it is still the self and therefore not a threat.        
Because enlightenment is the nature of the self the idea that no mind 
is enlightenment implies a duality between the self and thought.  That the 
self does not exist when the mind exists means that the self and the mind 
enjoy the same order of reality like a table and a chair.  But this is untrue.  If 
one exists only in the absence of the other they enjoy the same order of 
reality, like illness and health.   But does the existence of thought deny the 
existence of oneself?   Is there thought without you?  In fact thoughts come 
out of you but you are not just a thought.  They depend on you but you do 
not depend on them.  So whether they are present or absent you, the ever-
free ever-present self, can always be directly known.    
 
                                                           
12 A famous scripture, the ‘Patanjali Yoga Sutras,’ is the basis of this view.

19
Elimination of Unconscious Tendencies is Enlightenment?  
 
The thoughts and feelings in the mind are not self-generating but are 
the effects of subtle causes called vasanas, ‘sub’ or unconscious tendencies  
accumulated from past experience.  The sum total of these tendencies is 
often said to be the individual.  And since they are the cause of all the 
individual’s habits they are prior to the individual and therefore bind the 
individual to a repetitive cycle of experience.  To free oneself of this 
bondage it is believed that the vasanas must be completely exhausted.  Since 
there are no longer any tendencies to constitute an individual or to keep the 
individual together it is believed that the individual dissolves and the self, 
which is what remains, is realized by default.  But if the individual is gone 
who is there to realize the self?  The self obviously does not need to realize 
anything because it is already realized.  
A second problem with this theory is that nobody knows how many 
vasanas are stored in the unconscious, perhaps billions or more, so it might 
take millions of lifetimes to exhaust them.  A third is that in a non-dual 
reality there are not two separate principles, the self and the vasanas.  If the 
self alone exists as scripture says, and the vasanas exist, they would only 
exist as the self.  In other words they would be dependent for their reality on 
the self, just as a clay pot is dependent on clay for its reality.  Anything that 
depends on something else for its existence is not real.  Experienciable, yes, 
but not real, meaning unchanging.  If vasanas are the self but the self is not 
the vasanas, it is already free of them and no work needs to be done to ‘gain’ 
the self.  
  But if enlightenment is the knowledge “I am the self, limitless 
awareness,” this knowledge would necessarily take place in the mind.  
Furthermore, if the mind were excessively disturbed by thoughts and 
feelings in the form of likes and dislikes and these likes and dislikes, fears 
and desires, were conscious effects of which the vasanas were the cause, as 
scripture states, then the mind could be brought to a clear, calm state, by 
exhausting the vasanas disturbing it...making it fit for knowledge.  
Therefore, vasana exhaustion is useful to prepare the mind for self 
knowledge but is not tantamount to enlightenment.   
 
 
Stages of Enlightenment ? 
 
 If the problem is ignorance and en lightenment is the understanding 
backed by experience that I am limitless, to say that there are stages of

20
enlightenment is like saying that a woman is a little bit pregnant.  Contrary 
to popular belief no enlightened person13 is more or less enlightened than 
any other because the self is one unchanging awareness.   
 Then how does one account for the apparent differences in 
understanding and experience that one sees from one enlightened being to 
another?  There is no question of enlightenment from the self’s point of view 
because there is no ignorance.  And because the self is non-dual there is no 
experience in it.  But the self is capable of creating the appearance of 
duality.  Just as a spider is both the substance of its web and the intelligence 
that shapes it, the self appears as the world and shapes the individual entities 
in it.  What is called experience is the self functioning through the various 
entities (plant, animal and human) just as electricity functions through 
various appliances.  Expressing through a bulb it produces light, through a 
heater heat, and through a radio sound.  Though the manifestations are 
superficially different all are just electricity transformed by its contact with 
the appliance.   
 There are no ‘enlightened beings’ b ecause there is only one formless  
self.   So when knowledge destroys a person’s sense of individuality, the 
individual ‘becomes’ the self by default.  The ‘becoming’ is not a physical 
change or the experiential removal of the individual.  It is a change in 
understanding.  Just as knowledge of the nature of a mirage will prevent 
one from taking it to be water, the knowledge that I am the self allows 
one to understand that the experiencer, the individual, is only an 
apparent, not a real self.   
An ‘enlightened being’ is just the self functioning through a mind 
whose self ignorance has been removed.  But the removal of self ignorance 
does not automatically remove the vasanas in the mind although it 
eventually renders them non-binding since they bind only because of 
ignorance.  Since from the self’s point of view all the vasanas are known to 
be only the self, it has no preferences as to the type of vasana it illumines.  
Therefore it works through the existing vasanas.  Because the vasanas are 
the cause of the mind’s energy, attitudes and opinions, ignorance and 
knowledge and every mind has unique and varied experiences, the self 
                                                           
13 The concept ‘enlightened person’ is not strictly correct, unless the self is thought of as a person.  In fact 
in some scriptures the self is referred to as the ‘universal person’ but this does not mean that the Self is a 
person as we understand it.  ‘Impersonal’ or a ‘state’ are perhaps more accurate words to describe the self 
but certain minds have trouble with abstract concepts so, to make it understandable to this kind of mind it is 
sometimes called a ‘supreme person,’ or God.  The word ‘person’ is used because people are the most 
conscious objects in the creation and the self is consciousness.  Enlightenment is the loss of the sense of 
limitation that characterizes a person, so it is not correct to think of the person as an individual any more.  
The loss of the person’s sense of limitation is the appreciation of oneself as everything that is.

21
seems to be unique and varied.  This ‘seeming’ is caused by lack of 
discrimination, the power to separate the real from the experiential, so that  
an indiscriminate person will wrongly assume that there are many types of 
enlightened beings and many stages of enlightenment.     
 
 
The Stages of Enlightenment   
 
(1) Endarkenment 
 
Nonetheless, from the individual’s point of view there are three 
‘stages of enlightenment.’  The first stage might well be called 
‘endarkenment.’  We come into this life experiencing our limitlessness and 
oneness with everything but, because the intellect has yet to develop, we do 
not understand what we are experiencing.  When the intellect does develop it 
is trained to think of the self as a limited, incomplete, inadequate creature 
and encouraged to solve the problem of inadequacy by picking up 
experience in life.  At a certain point, the individual comes to realize that no 
matter how much experience he or she can garner, the experienced objects 
and activities do not do the job.  This is usually an unpleasant realization, 
often resulting in a profound disillusionment with life and is frequently 
referred to as the ‘dark night of the soul’ in religious literature or ‘hitting 
bottom’ in popular culture.    
Most react to this existential crisis by sinking into distracting habits, 
mind numbing substances and/or frivolous entertainments, but for unknown 
reasons a few begin to enjoy a variety of peculiar and invariably confusing  
religious or spiritual experiences that lead them to the idea of God or some 
sort of ‘inner light’ or ‘higher state.’  And at some point during this period 
the person becomes convinced that he or she can find happiness ‘within’ or 
in some relationship with God.   
 
(2) Self Realization/Self Inquiry 
 
The second stage might be termed the ‘seeking’ or ‘questing’ phase 
and usually heads off in two apparently separate directions.  The religious 
road leads to the development of a personal relationship with God who is 
conceived as a pure and perfect someone other than one’s self.  The idea of 
the self as inadequate, incomplete, and separate is retained and often 
conceived of as corrupted by sin.  Salvation is meant to lie in invoking the 
grace of God through prayer and the study of scripture and working hard

22
here on earth for a place in the ‘promised land,’ a heaven far from this veil 
of tears which can only be accessed by relinquishing the physical body.  The 
religious life offers a positive alternative to the belief in the world as a 
source of meaning.    
The other branch of the road leads in a less doctrinal and belief-laden 
direction into the experience of the ‘inner’ world and an investigation of the 
self.  In its worldly form it may incline one to the study of psychology but in 
its ‘spiritual’ form the person experiences epiphanies, fleeting samadhis, 
satoris14 and the like that give rise to the conviction that the ‘the truth’ 
dwells ‘within’ as the ‘higher’ or ‘inner’ self or as some transcendental state 
of consciousness.15  He or she will probably characterize the changes during 
this phase as an ‘awakening.’  Although the experience of the inner 
self/truth/state is invariably uplifting and intensifies one’s quest, it is always 
confusing because the information one gathers challenges the habitual view 
of oneself as a needy, incomplete, inadequate, separate creature.  Many of 
these experiences can truthfully be described as the experience of oneness 
with all things, limitlessness, and of transcendent bliss.   
During this stage which might be also called the meditation stage, the 
mind, formerly riveted on happenings in the outer world turns inward and 
fixes itself on the self, the ‘light within,’ and at some point, usually after 
intense investigation, ‘realizes’ the self, since the self is the source of all 
experience.  This ‘realization’ is always in the form of an experience and is 
thought by many to be the end of the search...and the ultimate ‘state.’   But 
Vedanta says that while this is a welcome and enjoyable ‘state’ it is not the 
end because there is still a sense of separation between the experiencer and 
the object of experience, the self.  When there is separation there is doubt 
and the doubt is always that this ‘state,’ like all states will end, plunging the 
experiencer back into darkness...which invariably happens because what is 
actually happening is that the experience is actually not the experience of the 
self but a reflection of the self in a still mind and since both the experiencer, 
the ego, and the mind are in time they are subject to change.    
This doubt is due to the failure of the experiencer to understand that 
what is being experienced is just his own self...in which case it could never 
be lost.  The failure to convert the experience to knowledge is usually caused 
by the belief in the experiencer that knowledge is merely intellectual and 
that there is such a thing as a permanent experience.  So when the experience 
happens the intellect gets submerged in the bliss, peace, and radiance and 
                                                           
14 Terms from different traditions that indicate an experiential glimpse of God, the Void, the inner self, etc.  
15 Often persons who have had ‘out of body’ or near death experiences see the self in this way.

23
switches off, as it does in most intense sensuous experiences, and stops 
inquiring.   
To enter the ‘final’ stage, which is not a stage, inquiry must continue 
during the experience of the self.  In ordinary perception a thought wave 
arises in the mind that corresponds to the nature of the perceived object.  
You see a tree and you know it is a tree because the self, awareness 
illumines the thought of tree as it arises in the intellect.  Similarly when the 
ego experiences the reflection of the self in a pure mind a thought 
corresponding to the nature of the self, called an akandakara vritti, an 
unbroken ‘I’ thought arises, and this thought needs to be owned.   When it is 
taken as one’s own, it is this ‘I’ thought, backed by experience, that destroys 
the notion in the ego/mind that it is limited, incomplete and separate.   
 
(3) Enlightenment 
 
At this point everything stops and there is a subtle shift in awareness 
in which the foreground becomes the background and the background the 
foreground.  The ego/mind, the subject, meditating on the self, the object, 
becomes the subject and the subject, formerly the object, becomes the 
subject.   And this never changes because it was obtained through the 
knowledge that what I experience is me but I am not what I experience.  
In other words, one ‘becomes’ the Self.  Unlike an experience, the self can 
never be lost because it is me, the basis of everything...and there is nothing 
other than it to lose it.   
 
Enlightenment as Energy? 
 
A major misconception brought on by human being’s fascination with 
and craving for experience is the belief that enlightened beings have a 
special kind of ‘energy’ and that that energy is a consequence of their 
enlightenment.  But experience confirms and scripture states that the self is 
energyless, so if I am the self I have no energy.  Then how does it appear as 
if it were energy?   
The self does not appear as energy until it illumines a given mind.  
The mind is just the vasanas of a given individual entity.  These vasanas are 
subtle matter.  Matter is inert.  But when it is illumined by the self it 
becomes dynamic, just as a seed will remain dormant until it gets water and 
sunlight.  The vasanas are conditioned by three types of energy: sattvic, 
rajasic, and tamasic.

24
Tamasic energy16 is a heavy,dull, sleepy energy, as if the mind were 
under a cloud.  Rajas17 is a projecting energy, a passionate, dynamic, 
outgoing unsettling energy.  And sattva18 is the state when the mind is 
luminous, clear, still, and aware.  When the self illumines the tamasic 
vasanas the person appears to be ignorant and sleepy and lack motivation.  
When the self illumines rajasic vasanas, the person is exceptionally 
dynamic and powerful, often highly motivated.  When the self illumines 
sattva the person is clear and bright, very knowledgeable and loving.   
Most beings, because of their sense of incompleteness, chase tamasic 
objects (physical things and sensual pleasure) with rajasic passion.  
Therefore their vasanas are predominately tamasic and rajasic.  So if a 
person who has tamasic vasanas somehow wakes up and discovers that he 
or she is actually the self, his or her energy will be predominately tamasic 
and rajasic even if the knowledge is firm...unless work is done to transform 
the vasanas.   A small class of people realize that tamasic and rajasic 
vasanas produce the unpleasant experiences of craving and aversion and 
evolve methods to rid themselves of them.  If and when they realize the self, 
they will be exceptionally luminous, because the mind is so still it accurately 
reflects the radiance of the self.   
There is one more so-called spiritual phenomenon, the shaktipat guru, 
a person with exceptionally powerful and radiant energy, energy that is 
capable of creating intense experiences in proximate minds.  It is often 
assumed that such gurus are enlightened.  They may be if they have the firm 
knowledge that ‘I am limitless awareness’ and the mind is particularly 
sattvic, but there is another way to account for this phenomenon that has 
nothing to do with enlightenment.  
There is a group of scientific yogic practices handed down from 
antiquity that accumulate energy.  The practice of accumulating energy is 
called ‘tapas’ or ‘heat producing.’  The idea behind tapas is that energy 
flows from the subtlest layer of reality, the unconscious mind, into the 
conscious mind, and out through the senses into the world at large.  The 
source of this energy, the self (which is not energy) is limitless so the energy 
is limitless.  This is why the universe, which is just energy, is limitless.   
In any case, if the energy is blocked at the sense level, not allowed to 
flow into objects (activities that dissipate it), it will accumulate in the mind 
which is also limitless because it is just the self in a particular form of 
energy called chitta.  The practice involves considerable will power because 
                                                           
16 Avarana shakti 
17 Vikeshepa shakti 
18 Jnana shakti

25
the vasanas are dynamic and need to express themselves so when they are 
frustrated they remain in the mind in the form of heat.  When enough energy 
accumulates in the mind it produces light.  This kind of mind energy is like 
water behind a dam.  It appears still and luminous but it has a tremendous 
potential.  So when it is allowed to escape from the mind it flows into less 
dynamic minds and lifts them up, just as water flowing fills a hole in the 
ground.     
The primary purpose of this practice is to incinerate vasanas for the 
purpose of gaining the kind of pure mind necessary for enlightenment.   
When the mind accumulates energy in this way, the energy can activate 
latent tendencies in the chitta and certain miraculous ‘supernatural’ powers 
may appear including the power to spiritually ‘awaken’ others.  In fact, there 
is nothing particularly ‘spiritual’ about the experience (‘spiritual’ 
awakenings happen in every conceivable ‘worldly’ circumstance more often 
than they do in apparently ‘spiritual’ settings)19 except the association with 
such a person in a ‘spiritual’ setting.  If the aspirant is unclear about the goal, 
enlightenment, he or she may be tempted to capitalize on this situation to 
impress an ever-gullible sensation-seeking public who has no idea of the true 
nature of enlightenment.   And, because the goal has not been reached, the 
yogi often assumes that the experience of intense energy is the goal and 
propagates the belief that enlightenment is a particular kind of experience.  
The New Age culture and the recent satsang gurus are especially guilty of 
spreading this frustrating20 belief.   
But because a person has extraordinary energy does not mean that he 
or she is not enlightened.  Indeed, if the person has purified the mind before 
enlightenment, he or she will have energy and enlightenment.  If the 
enlightenment came in spite of the condition of the mind, the mind can be 
quickly purified from the self’s position, rendering the person energetic and 
wise.    
Very often an unenlightened person with a particular gift attracts 
many people.  Being the focus of many minds increases the energy in his or 
her mind and that energy flows back into the surrounding minds producing a 
range of experiences from sublime to demonic...depending on the condition 
of the mind channeling and the minds receiving the energy.  This person, 
like the shakti-pat yogi, is often considered enlightened because he or she 
                                                           
19 The author’s spiritual awakening happened in the Post Office at Waikiki Beach, Hawaii.  
20 The belief is frustrating because the experience of the self invariably ends and the person is returned to 
his or her previous ‘state’.  Because the experience was uplifting it causes the person to court it again and 
again so that in the spiritual world you find a class of people who could only be described as spiritual 
junkies, continually craving what they have just lost.

26
seems to be very powerful.  Because the mind has not been properly purified 
it is incapable of functioning normally at high states of vibration and it 
becomes unstable.  Then the person loses his or her discrimination and 
makes foolish decisions that effectively ruin his or her life and the lives of 
those who associate with them.  Recent spiritual history is replete with tales 
of this sad phenomenon.   
It is quite possible, and indeed the rule rather than the exception, that 
a regular person with a normal state of mind wakes up and goes on to 
‘attain’21 enlightenment.  In this case the person, who is actually the self and 
knows it, operates through a very ordinary life, and anyone coming into 
contact with him or her would have no idea of his or her ‘state.’22 
 
The Problem of Language 
 
Two languages obtain in the spiritual world.  The most popular and 
most imprecise is the language of experience which has been propagated by 
the yogic tradition.  The least popular and most precise is the language of 
identity or knowledge employed by Vedanta.  In the best of all possible 
worlds there should be no cross-pollination.  Each has its value and is 
specific to its view of enlightenment.   
 Because the yogic view of enlighten ment is ‘experiential’ it employs a 
dualistic language because experience is dualistic, the relationship between a 
subject and an object.  According to this view enlightenment is a unique, 
permanent experience of the Self.  The problem with this view is that the 
Upanishads, the ultimate authority on the nature enlightenment, describe the 
self, which is everything that exists, in the language of identity as a ‘non-
dual’ reality and enlightenment as the knowledge ‘I am the limitless self’
23 
based on the discovery24 of oneself as such.     
The usual progression in understanding takes one from the language 
of experience to the language of identity.  There are many people in the 
spiritual world who have had considerable experience of the reflection of the 
self in the mind when the mind was in a sattvic condition and who would be 
classified as self realized according to the stages of enlightenment 
mentioned above.  But, rightly, these people are not satisfied and continue to 
entertain doubts about their ‘state.’  Usually the doubt has to do with making 
                                                           
21 Enlightenment is not attained as an experience or an object is attained.  If it is an attainment at all it is the 
gaining of the hard and fast understanding ‘I am the self.’  
22 In fact enlightenment is not a ‘state.’  A state by definition changes and the self does not change.  
Because the mind is in duality it is subject to change and can therefore entertain many different states.   
23 Aham Brahmasmi 
24 Actually enlightenment is always a redicovery because the self is never new.

27
the state permanent, which is impossible since the person and his pure mind 
is still in the realm of time.  In other words there is always the realistic fear 
that the experience will not last.   And even though they are so close to 
enlightenment experientially, it still eludes them.  And the reason?  Because 
they are prisoners of the language of experience.   
The language we use indicates the way we think.  And at this stage, 
when the experience is more or less continually available, the only barrier to 
converting the experience to a ‘permanent’ state, not that enlightenment is a 
state, is the way one thinks. What needs to happen at this point is that the 
individual needs to convert the language of experience to the language of 
identity.  The language of identity states that the experiencer and what is 
being experienced are not two separate things, that they are in fact the same.   
When any object is experienced the knowledge of that object arises 
simultaneously in the intellect.  And if the mind in which the reflection of 
the self is pure, the knowledge of the self will arise with it in the intellect.  
This knowledge is in the form of a thought, an akandakara vritti, an 
unbroken idea that I am the whole and complete actionless awareness that I 
am experiencing.  If the person is accustomed to thinking of the self as an 
object, he or she will be reluctant to surrender the experiencer, and the 
self will continue to remain as an experienced object.  The surrender is in 
terms of letting go of the idea of oneself as an experiencer and embracing 
one’s limitless identity.  
Were the person to be trained in the language of identity, this problem 
would not arise.  In fact the person would immediately recognize the content 
of the experience as ‘I’ and that would finish the work.  The whole of 
Vedanta can be reduced to one simple equation found in the Upanishads 
‘You are that’ where ‘that’ is the self and ‘you’ is the self in the form of the 
experiencer and the verb ‘are’ is indicates the identity between the two.     
 
 
*** 
 
 Although Vedanta is in the public  domain many of these ideas were 
culled from an obscure pamphlet written by Swami Dayananda Saraswati, 
perhaps India’s foremost teacher of Vedanta, entitled ‘The Teaching 
Tradition of Advaita Vedanta.’  It was  written for persons well versed in 
both Sanskrit and Vedanta, perhaps his many students, and would not be 
considered an easy read for anyone unfamiliar with traditional Vedanta.  The 
need for a return to traditional Vedanta arose because of the hybridization of

28
Vedanta and Yoga over the last one hundred years which has produced 
considerable confusion about the nature of enlightenment.  
This mixture is no more evident than in the teachings of my guru, 
Swami Chinmayanda, an extraordinary personality and one of the most 
famous and effective teachers of the last century who spearheaded a 
renaissance of Vedanta in post-colonial India.   The Swami, who was a 
national figure, promoted himself as a ‘modern’ Swami and his teachings 
came to be known as ‘modern’ Vedanta, perhaps to widen their appeal in a 
backward country struggling to enter the modern era.  
Swami Dayananda, who served the Chinmaya Mission for many years 
and was groomed to head the mission when Chinmayananda died but later 
separated from it and went on to teach Vedanta independently, begins his 
pamphlet with the sentence “I call myself a traditional teacher of Vedanta” 
and goes on to analyze many of the contentions of ‘modern’ Vedanta in light 
of the traditional teachings.  
 And while Chinmayandana was my guru and his teachings are 
responsible for my enlightenment, after many years of reflection I find 
myself in complete agreement with Swami Dayanada about the need to 
purge Vedanta of the ideas that invariably keep creeping into it, particularly 
the idea of enlightenment as a transcendental experience or an experience of 
the self.  If the traditional teachings are not maintained, in a few generations 
Vedanta will no longer be an effective means of self knowledge.
 Traditional Vedanta means that none of the ideas belong to any 
individual but can be traced back to the Upanishads, Brahma Sutras, and the 
Bhagavad Gita and that enlightenment is ultimately a problem of 
understanding, not experience.  Swami Dayananda is a brilliant teacher of 
Vedanta skilled in the traditional teaching methods and it would be 
impossible to find fault with his presentation of Vedanta. 
 Because it was responsible for my enlightenment, for more than ten 
years I did not question Chinmaya’s modern Vedanta and propagated it with 
zeal.  But as I cooled down and the self illumined the farthest reaches of my 
mind I re-entered the ancient texts I began to understand that at the highest 
level of spiritual evolution Yoga and Vedanta need to part company.   So 
when I came across Swami Dayananda’s pamphlet it confirmed my own 
thinking.   
 I used the structure of the pamp hlet, was faithful to Dayananda’s 
logic, translated much of the Sanskrit into English, shamelessly used and 
improved some of his language, and fattened the text by bringing in a 
number of ideas relating to popular misunderstandings about the nature of 
enlightenment.  I believe it is important to stand up for Vedanta nowadays

29
because it has been co-opted by Europeans and Americans and mightily 
corrupted.  Rarely do Westerners take the time to learn any ancient tradition 
as a whole from the inside as it is, preferring instead to pick and choose only 
the easy ideas that appeal to them.  Once they have plundered what they 
want they tend to mix them with popular ideas drawn from disparate sources 
to create weak and laughable hybrids.   
 It is important to keep Vedanta pure because it is a time-tested means 
of enlightenment.  And when it becomes corrupted it can no longer do its 
job...erasing the ignorance of the limitless nature of the self.