The Doors of Perception & Heaven and Hell
Aldous Huxley

For M

“If the doors of perception were cleansed every thing would appear to man as
it is, infinite.”
—WILLIAM BLAKE

Contents
Epigraph
The Doors of Perception
Heaven and Hell
Appendices
P.S. Insights, Interviews & More…
About the Author
Other Books by Aldous Huxley
Credits
Copyright
About the Publisher

The DOORS of PERCEPTION

It was in 1886 that the German pharmacologist, Louis
Lewin, published the first systematic study of the cactus, to which his
own name was subsequently given. Anhalonium Lewinii was new to
science. To primitive religion and the Indians of Mexico and the
American Southwest it was a friend of immemorially long standing.
Indeed, it was much more than a friend. In the words of one of the early
Spanish visitors to the New World, “they eat a root which they call
peyote, and which they venerate as though it were a deity.”
Why they should have venerated it as a deity became apparent
when such eminent psychologists as Jaensch, Havelock Ellis and Weir
Mitchell began their experiments with mescalin, the active principle of
peyote. True, they stopped short at a point well this side of idolatry; but
all concurred in assigning to mescalin a position among drugs of unique
distinction. Administered in suitable doses, it changes the quality of
consciousness more profoundly and yet is less toxic than any other
substance in the pharmacologist’s repertory.
Mescalin research has been going on sporadically ever since the
days of Lewin and Havelock Ellis. Chemists have not merely isolated the
alkaloid; they have learned how to synthesize it, so that the supply no
longer depends on the sparse and intermittent crop of a desert cactus.
Alienists have dosed themselves with mescalin in the hope thereby of
coming to a better, a first-hand, understanding of their patients’ mental
processes. Working unfortunately upon too few subjects within too
narrow a range of circumstances, psychologists have observed and
catalogued some of the drug’s more striking effects. Neurologists and
physiologists have found out something about the mechanism of its
action upon the central nervous system. And at least one professional
philosopher has taken mescalin for the light it may throw on such
ancient, unsolved riddles as the place of mind in nature and the
relationship between brain and consciousness.
There matters rested until, two or three years ago, a new and
perhaps highly significant fact was observed.* Actually the fact had

been staring everyone in the face for several decades; but nobody, as it
happened, had noticed it until a young English psychiatrist, at present
working in Canada, was struck by the close similarity, in chemical
composition, between mescalin and adrenalin. Further research
revealed that lysergic acid, an extremely potent hallucinogen derived
from ergot, has a structural biochemical relationship to the others. Then
came the discovery that adrenochrome, which is a product of the
decomposition of adrenalin, can produce many of the symptoms
observed in mescalin intoxication. But adrenochrome probably occurs
spontaneously in the human body. In other words, each one of us may
be capable of manufacturing a chemical, minute doses of which are
known to cause profound changes in consciousness. Certain of these
changes are similar to those which occur in that most characteristic
plague of the twentieth century, schizophrenia. Is the mental disorder
due to a chemical disorder? And is the chemical disorder due, in its
turn, to psychological distresses affecting the adrenals? It would be rash
and premature to affirm it. The most we can say is that some kind of a
prima facie case has been made out. Meanwhile the clue is being
systematically followed, the sleuths—biochemists, psychiatrists,
psychologists—are on the trail.
By a series of, for me, extremely fortunate circumstances I found
myself, in the spring of 1953, squarely athwart that trail. One of the
sleuths had come on business to California. In spite of seventy years of
mescalin research, the psychological material at his disposal was still
absurdly inadequate, and he was anxious to add to it. I was on the spot
and willing, indeed eager, to be a guinea pig. Thus it came about that,
one bright May morning, I swallowed four-tenths of a gram of mescalin
dissolved in half a glass of water and sat down to wait for the results.
We live together, we act on, and react to, one another; but always
and in all circumstances we are by ourselves. The martyrs go hand in
hand into the arena; they are crucified alone. Embraced, the lovers
desperately try to fuse their insulated ecstasies into a single self-
transcendence; in vain. By its very nature every embodied spirit is
doomed to suffer and enjoy in solitude. Sensations, feelings, insights,
fancies—all these are private and, except through symbols and at
second hand, incommunicable. We can pool information about
experiences, but never the experiences themselves. From family to
nation, every human group is a society of island universes.
Most island universes are sufficiently like one another to permit of
inferential understanding or even of mutual empathy or “feeling into.”

Thus, remembering our own bereavements and humiliations, we can
condole with others in analogous circumstances, can put ourselves
(always, of course, in a slightly Pickwickian sense) in their places. But
in certain cases communication between universes is incomplete or even
nonexistent. The mind is its own place, and the places inhabited by the
insane and the exceptionally gifted are so different from the places
where ordinary men and women live, that there is little or no common
ground of memory to serve as a basis for understanding or fellow
feeling. Words are uttered, but fail to enlighten. The things and events
to which the symbols refer belong to mutually exclusive realms of
experience.
To see ourselves as others see us is a most salutary gift. Hardly less
important is the capacity to see others as they see themselves. But what
if these others belong to a different species and inhabit a radically alien
universe? For example, how can the sane get to know what it actually
feels like to be mad? Or, short of being born again as a visionary, a
medium, or a musical genius, how can we ever visit the worlds which,
to Blake, to Swedenborg, to Johann Sebastian Bach, were home? And
how can a man at the extreme limits of ectomorphy and cerebrotonia
ever put himself in the place of one at the limits of endomorphy and
viscerotonia, or, except within certain circumscribed areas, share the
feelings of one who stands at the limits of mesomorphy and
somatotonia? To the unmitigated behaviorist such questions, I suppose,
are meaningless. But for those who theoretically believe what in
practice they know to be true—namely, that there is an inside to
experience as well as an outside—the problems posed are real problems,
all the more grave for being, some completely insoluble, some soluble
only in exceptional circumstances and by methods not available to
everyone. Thus, it seems virtually certain that I shall never know what
it feels like to be Sir John Falstaff or Joe Louis. On the other hand, it
had always seemed to me possible that, through hypnosis, for example,
or autohypnosis, by means of systematic meditation, or else by taking
the appropriate drug, I might so change my ordinary mode of
consciousness as to be able to know, from the inside, what the
visionary, the medium, even the mystic were talking about.
From what I had read of the mescalin experience I was convinced in
advance that the drug would admit me, at least for a few hours, into the
kind of inner world described by Blake and Æ. But what I had expected
did not happen. I had expected to lie with my eyes shut, looking at
visions of many-colored geometries, of animated architectures, rich with

gems and fabulously lovely, of landscapes with heroic figures, of
symbolic dramas trembling perpetually on the verge of the ultimate
revelation. But I had not reckoned, it was evident, with the
idiosyncrasies of my mental make-up, the facts of my temperament,
training and habits.
I am and, for as long as I can remember, I have always been a poor
visualizer. Words, even the pregnant words of poets, do not evoke
pictures in my mind. No hypnagogic visions greet me on the verge of
sleep. When I recall something, the memory does not present itself to
me as a vividly seen event or object. By an effort of the will, I can evoke
a not very vivid image of what happened yesterday afternoon, of how
the Lungarno used to look before the bridges were destroyed, of the
Bayswater Road when the only buses were green and tiny and drawn by
aged horses at three and a half miles an hour. But such images have
little substance and absolutely no autonomous life of their own. They
stand to real, perceived objects in the same relation as Homer’s ghosts
stood to the men of flesh and blood, who came to visit them in the
shades. Only when I have a high temperature do my mental images
come to independent life. To those in whom the faculty of visualization
is strong my inner world must seem curiously drab, limited and
uninteresting. This was the world—a poor thing but my own—which I
expected to see transformed into something completely unlike itself.
The change which actually took place in that world was in no sense
revolutionary. Half an hour after swallowing the drug I became aware
of a slow dance of golden lights. A little later there were sumptuous red
surfaces swelling and expanding from bright nodes of energy that
vibrated with a continuously changing, patterned life. At another time
the closing of my eyes revealed a complex of gray structures, within
which pale bluish spheres kept emerging into intense solidity and,
having emerged, would slide noiselessly upwards, out of sight. But at no
time were there faces or forms of men or animals. I saw no landscapes,
no enormous spaces, no magical growth and metamorphosis of
buildings, nothing remotely like a drama or a parable. The other world
to which mescalin admitted me was not the world of visions; it existed
out there, in what I could see with my eyes open. The great change was
in the realm of objective fact. What had happened to my subjective
universe was relatively unimportant.
I took my pill at eleven. An hour and a half later, I was sitting in my
study, looking intently at a small glass vase. The vase contained only
three flowers—a fullblown Belle of Portugal rose, shell pink with a hint

at every petal’s base of a hotter, flamier hue; a large magenta and
cream-colored carnation; and, pale purple at the end of its broken stalk,
the bold heraldic blossom of an iris. Fortuitous and provisional, the
little nosegay broke all the rules of traditional good taste. At breakfast
that morning I had been struck by the lively dissonance of its colors. But
that was no longer the point. I was not looking now at an unusual
flower arrangement. I was seeing what Adam had seen on the morning
of his creation—the miracle, moment by moment, of naked existence.
“Is it agreeable?” somebody asked. (During this part of the
experiment, all conversations were recorded on a dictating machine,
and it has been possible for me to refresh my memory of what was
said.)
“Neither agreeable nor disagreeable,” I answered. “It just is.”
Istigkeit—wasn’t that the word Meister Eckhart liked to use? “Is-
ness.” The Being of Platonic philosophy—except that Plato seems to
have made the enormous, the grotesque mistake of separating Being
from becoming and identifying it with the mathematical abstraction of
the Idea. He could never, poor fellow, have seen a bunch of flowers
shining with their own inner light and all but quivering under the
pressure of the significance with which they were charged; could never
have perceived that what rose and iris and carnation so intensely
signified was nothing more, and nothing less, than what they were—a
transience that was yet eternal life, a perpetual perishing that was at the
same time pure Being, a bundle of minute, unique particulars in which,
by some unspeakable and yet self-evident paradox, was to be seen the
divine source of all existence.
I continued to look at the flowers, and in their living light I seemed
to detect the qualitative equivalent of breathing—but of a breathing
without returns to a starting point, with no recurrent ebbs but only a
repeated flow from beauty to heightened beauty, from deeper to ever
deeper meaning. Words like “grace” and “transfiguration” came to my
mind, and this, of course, was what, among other things, they stood for.
My eyes traveled from the rose to the carnation, and from that feathery
incandescence to the smooth scrolls of sentient amethyst which were
the iris. The Beatific Vision, Sat Chit Ananda, Being-Awareness-Bliss—
for the first time I understood, not on the verbal level, not by inchoate
hints or at a distance, but precisely and completely what those
prodigious syllables referred to. And then I remembered a passage I had
read in one of Suzuki’s essays. “What is the Dharma-Body of the
Buddha?” (“The Dharma-Body of the Buddha” is another way of saying

Mind, Suchness, the Void, the Godhead.) The question is asked in a Zen
monastery by an earnest and bewildered novice. And with the prompt
irrelevance of one of the Marx Brothers, the Master answers, “The hedge
at the bottom of the garden.” “And the man who realizes this truth,” the
novice dubiously inquires, “what, may I ask, is he?” Groucho gives him
a whack over the shoulders with his staff and answers, “A golden-haired
lion.”
It had been, when I read it, only a vaguely pregnant piece of
nonsense. Now it was all as clear as day, as evident as Euclid. Of course
the Dharma-Body of the Buddha was the hedge at the bottom of the
garden. At the same time, and no less obviously, it was these flowers, it
was anything that I—or rather the blessed Not-I, released for a moment
from my throttling embrace—cared to look at. The books, for example,
with which my study walls were lined. Like the flowers, they glowed,
when I looked at them, with brighter colors, a profounder significance.
Red books, like rubies; emerald books; books bound in white jade;
books of agate; of aquamarine, of yellow topaz; lapis lazuli books whose
color was so intense, so intrinsically meaningful, that they seemed to be
on the point of leaving the shelves to thrust themselves more insistently
on my attention.
“What about spatial relationships?” the investigator inquired, as I
was looking at the books.
It was difficult to answer. True, the perspective looked rather odd,
and the walls of the room no longer seemed to meet in right angles. But
these were not the really important facts. The really important facts
were that spatial relationships had ceased to matter very much and that
my mind was perceiving the world in terms of other than spatial
categories. At ordinary times the eye concerns itself with such problems
as Where?—How far?—How situated in relation to what? In the mescalin
experience the implied questions to which the eye responds are of
another order. Place and distance cease to be of much interest. The
mind does its perceiving in terms of intensity of existence, profundity of
significance, relationships within a pattern. I saw the books, but was not
at all concerned with their positions in space. What I noticed, what
impressed itself upon my mind was the fact that all of them glowed
with living light and that in some the glory was more manifest than in
others. In this context position and the three dimensions were beside
the point. Not, of course, that the category of space had been abolished.
When I got up and walked about, I could do so quite normally, without

misjudging the whereabouts of objects. Space was still there; but it had
lost its predominance. The mind was primarily concerned, not with
measures and locations, but with being and meaning.
And along with indifference to space there went an even more
complete indifference to time.
“There seems to be plenty of it,” was all I would answer, when the
investigator asked me to say what I felt about time.
Plenty of it, but exactly how much was entirely irrelevant. I could,
of course, have looked at my watch; but my watch, I knew, was in
another universe. My actual experience had been, was still, of an
indefinite duration or alternatively of a perpetual present made up of
one continually changing apocalypse.
From the books the investigator directed my attention to the
furniture. A small typing table stood in the center of the room; beyond
it, from my point of view, was a wicker chair and beyond that a desk.
The three pieces formed an intricate pattern of horizontals, uprights and
diagonals—a pattern all the more interesting for not being interpreted
in terms of spatial relationships. Table, chair and desk came together in
a composition that was like something by Braque or Juan Gris, a still
life recognizably related to the objective world, but rendered without
depth, without any attempt at photographic realism. I was looking at
my furniture, not as the utilitarian who has to sit on chairs, to write at
desks and tables, and not as the cameraman or scientific recorder, but
as the pure aesthete whose concern is only with forms and their
relationships within the field of vision or the picture space. But as I
looked, this purely aesthetic, Cubist’s-eye view gave place to what I can
only describe as the sacramental vision of reality. I was back where I
had been when I was looking at the flowers—back in a world where
everything shone with the Inner Light, and was infinite in its
significance. The legs, for example, of that chair—how miraculous their
tubularity, how supernatural their polished smoothness! I spent several
minutes—or was it several centuries?—not merely gazing at those
bamboo legs, but actually being them—or rather being myself in them;
or, to be still more accurate (for “I” was not involved in the case, nor in
a certain sense were “they”) being my Not-self in the Not-self which was
the chair.
Reflecting on my experience, I find myself agreeing with the
eminent Cambridge philosopher, Dr. C. D. Broad, “that we should do
well to consider much more seriously than we have hitherto been

inclined to do the type of theory which Bergson put forward in
connection with memory and sense perception. The suggestion is that
the function of the brain and nervous system and sense organs is in the
main eliminative and not productive. Each person is at each moment
capable of remembering all that has ever happened to him and of
perceiving everything that is happening everywhere in the universe.
The function of the brain and nervous system is to protect us from being
overwhelmed and confused by this mass of largely useless and
irrelevant knowledge, by shutting out most of what we should
otherwise perceive or remember at any moment, and leaving only that
very small and special selection which is likely to be practically useful.”
According to such a theory, each one of us is potentially Mind at Large.
But in so far as we are animals, our business is at all costs to survive. To
make biological survival possible, Mind at Large has to be funneled
through the reducing valve of the brain and nervous system. What
comes out at the other end is a measly trickle of the kind of
consciousness which will help us to stay alive on the surface of this
particular planet. To formulate and express the contents of this reduced
awareness, man has invented and endlessly elaborated those symbol-
systems and implicit philosophies which we call languages. Every
individual is at once the beneficiary and the victim of the linguistic
tradition into which he has been born—the beneficiary inasmuch as
language gives access to the accumulated records of other people’s
experience, the victim in so far as it confirms him in the belief that
reduced awareness is the only awareness and as it bedevils his sense of
reality, so that he is all too apt to take his concepts for data, his words
for actual things. That which, in the language of religion, is called “this
world” is the universe of reduced awareness, expressed, and, as it were,
petrified by language. The various “other worlds,” with which human
beings erratically make contact are so many elements in the totality of
the awareness belonging to Mind at Large. Most people, most of the
time, know only what comes through the reducing valve and is
consecrated as genuinely real by the local language. Certain persons,
however, seem to be born with a kind of by-pass that circumvents the
reducing valve. In others temporary by-passes may be acquired either
spontaneously, or as the result of deliberate “spiritual exercises,” or
through hypnosis, or by means of drugs. Through these permanent or
temporary by-passes there flows, not indeed the perception “of
everything that is happening everywhere in the universe” (for the by-
pass does not abolish the reducing valve, which still excludes the total

content of Mind at Large), but something more than, and above all
something different from, the carefully selected utilitarian material
which our narrowed, individual minds regard as a complete, or at least
sufficient, picture of reality.
The brain is provided with a number of enzyme systems which serve
to co-ordinate its workings. Some of these enzymes regulate the supply
of glucose to the brain cells. Mescalin inhibits the production of these
enzymes and thus lowers the amount of glucose available to an organ
that is in constant need of sugar. When mescalin reduces the brain’s
normal ration of sugar what happens? Too few cases have been
observed, and therefore a comprehensive answer cannot yet be given.
But what happens to the majority of the few who have taken mescalin
under supervision can be summarized as follows.
(1) The ability to remember and to “think straight” is little if at all
reduced. (Listening to the recordings of my conversation under the
influence of the drug, I cannot discover that I was then any stupider
than I am at ordinary times.)
(2) Visual impressions are greatly intensified and the eye recovers
some of the perceptual innocence of childhood, when the sensum was
not immediately and automatically subordinated to the concept. Interest
in space is diminished and interest in time falls almost to zero.
(3) Though the intellect remains unimpaired and though perception
is enormously improved, the will suffers a profound change for the
worse. The mescalin taker sees no reason for doing anything in
particular and finds most of the causes for which, at ordinary times, he
was prepared to act and suffer, profoundly uninteresting. He can’t be
bothered with them, for the good reason that he has better things to
think about.
(4) These better things may be experienced (as I experienced them)
“out there,” or “in here,” or in both worlds, the inner and the outer,
simultaneously or successively. That they are better seems to be self-
evident to all mescalin takers who come to the drug with a sound liver
and an untroubled mind.
These effects of mescalin are the sort of effects you could expect to
follow the administration of a drug having the power to impair the
efficiency of the cerebral reducing valve. When the brain runs out of
sugar, the undernourished ego grows weak, can’t be bothered to
undertake the necessary chores, and loses all interest in those spatial
and temporal relationships which mean so much to an organism bent on
getting on in the world. As Mind at Large seeps past the no longer

watertight valve, all kinds of biologically useless things start to happen.
In some cases there may be extra-sensory perceptions. Other persons
discover a world of visionary beauty. To others again is revealed the
glory, the infinite value and meaningfulness of naked existence, of the
given, unconceptualized event. In the final stage of egolessness there is
an “obscure knowledge” that All is in all—that All is actually each. This
is as near, I take it, as a finite mind can ever come to “perceiving
everything that is happening everywhere in the universe.”
In this context, how significant is the enormous heightening, under
mescalin, of the perception of color! For certain animals it is
biologically very important to be able to distinguish certain hues. But
beyond the limits of their utilitarian spectrum, most creatures are
completely color blind. Bees, for example, spend most of their time
“deflowering the fresh virgins of the spring” but, as Von Frisch has
shown, they can recognize only a very few colors. Man’s highly
developed color sense is a biological luxury—inestimably precious to
him as an intellectual and spiritual being, but unnecessary to his
survival as an animal. To judge by the adjectives which Homer puts into
their mouths, the heroes of the Trojan War hardly excelled the bees in
their capacity to distinguish colors. In this respect, at least, mankind’s
advance has been prodigious.
Mescalin raises all colors to a higher power and makes the
percipient aware of innumerable fine shades of difference, to which, at
ordinary times, he is completely blind. It would seem that, for Mind at
Large, the so-called secondary characters of things are primary. Unlike
Locke, it evidently feels that colors are more important, better worth
attending to, than masses, positions and dimensions. Like mescalin
takers, many mystics perceive supernaturally brilliant colors, not only
with the inward eye, but even in the objective world around them.
Similar reports are made by psychics and sensitives. There are certain
mediums to whom the mescalin taker’s brief revelation is a matter,
during long periods, of daily and hourly experience.
From this long but indispensable excursion into the realm of theory,
we may now return to the miraculous facts—four bamboo chair legs in
the middle of a room. Like Wordsworth’s daffodils, they brought all
manner of wealth—the gift, beyond price, of a new direct insight into
the very Nature of Things, together with a more modest treasure of
understanding in the field, especially, of the arts.
A rose is a rose is a rose. But these chair legs were chair legs were

St. Michael and all angels. Four or five hours after the event, when the
effects of a cerebral sugar shortage were wearing off, I was taken for a
little tour of the city, which included a visit, towards sundown, to what
is modestly claimed to be the World’s Biggest Drug Store. At the back of
the W.B.D.S., among the toys, the greeting cards and the comics, stood a
row, surprisingly enough, of art books. I picked up the first volume that
came to hand. It was on Van Gogh, and the picture at which the book
opened was “The Chair”—that astounding portrait of a Ding an Sich,
which the mad painter saw, with a kind of adoring terror, and tried to
render on his canvas. But it was a task to which the power even of
genius proved wholly inadequate. The chair Van Gogh had seen was
obviously the same in essence as the chair I had seen. But, though
incomparably more real than the chairs of ordinary perception, the
chair in his picture remained no more than an unusually expressive
symbol of the fact. The fact had been manifested Suchness; this was
only an emblem. Such emblems are sources of true knowledge about the
Nature of Things, and this true knowledge may serve to prepare the
mind which accepts it for immediate insights on its own account. But
that is all. However expressive, symbols can never be the things they
stand for.
It would be interesting, in this context, to make a study of the works
of art available to the great knowers of Suchness. What sort of pictures
did Eckhart look at? What sculptures and paintings played a part in the
religious experience of St. John of the Cross, of Hakuin, of Huineng, of
William Law? The questions are beyond my power to answer; but I
strongly suspect that most of the great knowers of Suchness paid very
little attention to art—some refusing to have anything to do with it at
all, others being content with what a critical eye would regard as
second-rate, or even, tenth-rate, works. (To a person whose transfigured
and transfiguring mind can see the All in every this, the first-rateness or
tenth-rateness of even a religious painting will be a matter of the most
sovereign indifference.) Art, I suppose, is only for beginners, or else for
those resolute dead-enders, who have made up their minds to be
content with the ersatz of Suchness, with symbols rather than with what
they signify, with the elegantly composed recipe in lieu of actual
dinner.
I returned the Van Gogh to its rack and picked up the volume
standing next to it. It was a book on Botticelli. I turned the pages. “The
Birth of Venus”—never one of my favorites. “Mars and Venus,” that
loveliness so passionately denounced by poor Ruskin at the height of his

long-drawn sexual tragedy. The marvelously rich and intricate
“Calumny of Apelles.” And then a somewhat less familiar and not very
good picture, “Judith.” My attention was arrested and I gazed in
fascination, not at the pale neurotic heroine or her attendant, not at the
victim’s hairy head or the vernal landscape in the background, but at
the purplish silk of Judith’s pleated bodice and long wind-blown skirts.
This was something I had seen before—seen that very morning,
between the flowers and the furniture, when I looked down by chance,
and went on passionately staring by choice, at my own crossed legs.
Those folds in the trousers—what a labyrinth of endlessly significant
complexity! And the texture of the gray flannel—how rich, how deeply,
mysteriously sumptuous! And here they were again, in Botticelli’s
picture.
Civilized human beings wear clothes, therefore there can be no
portraiture, no mythological or historical storytelling without
representations of folded textiles. But though it may account for the
origins, mere tailoring can never explain the luxuriant development of
drapery as a major theme of all the plastic arts. Artists, it is obvious,
have always loved drapery for its own sake—or, rather, for their own.
When you paint or carve drapery, you are painting or carving forms
which, for all practical purposes, are non-representational—the kind of
unconditioned forms on which artists even in the most naturalistic
tradition like to let themselves go. In the average Madonna or Apostle
the strictly human, fully representational element accounts for about
ten per cent of the whole. All the rest consists of many colored
variations on the inexhaustible theme of crumpled wool or linen. And
these non-representational nine-tenths of a Madonna or an Apostle may
be just as important qualitatively as they are in quantity. Very often
they set the tone of the whole work of art, they state the key in which
the theme is being rendered, they express the mood, the temperament,
the attitude to life of the artist. Stoical serenity reveals itself in the
smooth surfaces, the broad untortured folds of Piero’s draperies. Torn
between fact and wish, between cynicism and idealism, Bernini tempers
the all but caricatural verisimilitude of his faces with enormous sartorial
abstractions, which are the embodiment, in stone or bronze, of the
everlasting commonplaces of rhetoric—the heroism, the holiness, the
sublimity to which mankind perpetually aspires, for the most part in
vain. And here are El Greco’s disquietingly visceral skirts and mantles;
here are the sharp, twisting, flame-like folds in which Cosimo Tura
clothes his figures: in the first, traditional spirituality breaks down into

a nameless physiological yearning; in the second, there writhes an
agonized sense of the world’s essential strangeness and hostility. Or
consider Watteau; his men and women play lutes, get ready for balls
and harlequinades, embark, on velvet lawns and under noble trees, for
the Cythera of every lover’s dream; their enormous melancholy and the
flayed, excruciating sensibility of their creator find expression, not in
the actions recorded, not in the gestures and the faces portrayed, but in
the relief and texture of their taffeta skirts, their satin capes and
doublets. Not an inch of smooth surface here, not a moment of peace or
confidence, only a silken wilderness of countless tiny pleats and
wrinkles, with an incessant modulation—inner uncertainty rendered
with the perfect assurance of a master hand—of tone into tone, of one
indeterminate color into another. In life, man proposes, God disposes. In
the plastic arts the proposing is done by the subject matter; that which
disposes is ultimately the artist’s temperament, proximately (at least in
portraiture, history and genre) the carved or painted drapery. Between
them, these two may decree that a fête galante shall move to tears, that
a crucifixion shall be serene to the point of cheerfulness, that a
stigmatization shall be almost intolerably sexy, that the likeness of a
prodigy of female brainlessness (I am thinking now of Ingres’
incomparable Mme. Moitessier) shall express the austerest, the most
uncompromising intellectuality.
But this is not the whole story. Draperies, as I had now discovered,
are much more than devices for the introduction of non-
representational forms into naturalistic paintings and sculptures. What
the rest of us see only under the influence of mescalin, the artist is
congenitally equipped to see all the time. His perception is not limited
to what is biologically or socially useful. A little of the knowledge
belonging to Mind at Large oozes past the reducing valve of brain and
ego, into his consciousness. It is a knowledge of the intrinsic
significance of every existent. For the artist as for the mescalin taker
draperies are living hieroglyphs that stand in some peculiarly expressive
way for the unfathomable mystery of pure being. More even than the
chair, though less perhaps than those wholly supernatural flowers, the
folds of my gray flannel trousers were charged with “is-ness.” To what
they owed this privileged status, I cannot say. Is it, perhaps, because the
forms of folded drapery are so strange and dramatic that they catch the
eye and in this way force the miraculous fact of sheer existence upon
the attention? Who knows? What is important is less the reason for the
experience than the experience itself. Poring over Judith’s skirts, there

in the World’s Biggest Drug Store, I knew that Botticelli—and not
Botticelli alone, but many others too—had looked at draperies with the
same transfigured and transfiguring eyes as had been mine that
morning. They had seen the Istigkeit, the Allness and Infinity of folded
cloth and had done their best to render it in paint or stone. Necessarily,
of course, without success. For the glory and the wonder of pure
existence belong to another order, beyond the power of even the
highest art to express. But in Judith’s skirt I could clearly see what, if I
had been a painter of genius, I might have made of my old gray
flannels. Not much, heaven knows, in comparison with the reality, but
enough to delight generation after generation of beholders, enough to
make them understand at least a little of the true significance of what,
in our pathetic imbecility, we call “mere things” and disregard in favor
of television.
“This is how one ought to see,” I kept saying as I looked down at my
trousers, or glanced at the jeweled books in the shelves, at the legs of
my infinitely more than Van-Goghian chair. “This is how one ought to
see, how things really are.” And yet there were reservations. For if one
always saw like this, one would never want to do anything else. Just
looking, just being the divine Not-self of flower, of book, of chair, of
flannel. That would be enough. But in that case what about other
people? What about human relations? In the recording of that
morning’s conversations I find the question constantly repeated, “What
about human relations?” How could one reconcile this timeless bliss of
seeing as one ought to see with the temporal duties of doing what one
ought to do and feeling as one ought to feel? “One ought to be able,” I
said, “to see these trousers as infinitely important and human beings as
still more infinitely important.” One ought—but in practice it seemed to
be impossible. This participation in the manifest glory of things left no
room, so to speak, for the ordinary, the necessary concerns of human
existence, above all for concerns involving persons. For persons are
selves and, in one respect at least, I was now a Not-self, simultaneously
perceiving and being the Not-self of the things around me. To this new-
born Not-self, the behavior, the appearance, the very thought of the self
it had momentarily ceased to be, and of other selves, its one-time
fellows, seemed not indeed distasteful (for distastefulness was not one
of the categories in terms of which I was thinking), but enormously
irrelevant. Compelled by the investigator to analyze and report on what
I was doing (and how I longed to be left alone with Eternity in a flower,
Infinity in four chair legs and the Absolute in the folds of a pair of

flannel trousers!), I realized that I was deliberately avoiding the eyes of
those who were with me in the room, deliberately refraining from being
too much aware of them. One was my wife, the other a man I respected
and greatly liked; but both belonged to the world from which, for the
moment, mescalin had delivered me—the world of selves, of time, of
moral judgments and utilitarian considerations, the world (and it was
this aspect of human life which I wished, above all else, to forget) of
self-assertion, of cocksureness, of overvalued words and idolatrously
worshiped notions.
At this stage of the proceedings I was handed a large colored
reproduction of the well-known self-portrait by Cézanne—the head and
shoulders of a man in a large straw hat, red-cheeked, red-lipped, with
rich black whiskers and a dark unfriendly eye. It is a magnificent
painting; but it was not as a painting that I now saw it. For the head
promptly took on a third dimension and came to life as a small goblin-
like man looking out through a window in the page before me. I started
to laugh. And when they asked me why, “What pretensions!” I kept
repeating. “Who on earth does he think he is?” The question was not
addressed to Cézanne in particular, but to the human species at large.
Who did they all think they were?
“It’s like Arnold Bennett in the Dolomites,” I said, suddenly
remembering a scene, happily immortalized in a snapshot, of A.B., some
four or five years before his death, toddling along a wintry road at
Cortina d’Ampezzo. Around him lay the virgin snow; in the background
was a more than gothic aspiration of red crags. And there was dear,
kind, unhappy A.B., consciously overacting the role of his favorite
character in fiction, himself, the Card in person. There he went,
toddling slowly in the bright Alpine sunshine, his thumbs in the
armholes of a yellow waistcoat which bulged, a little lower down, with
the graceful curve of a Regency bow window at Brighton—his head
thrown back as though to aim some stammered utterance, howitzer-
like, at the blue dome of heaven. What he actually said, I have
forgotten; but what his whole manner, air and posture fairly shouted
was, “I’m as good as those damned mountains.” And in some ways, of
course, he was infinitely better; but not, as he knew very well, in the
way his favorite character in fiction liked to imagine.
Successfully (whatever that may mean) or unsuccessfully, we all
overact the part of our favorite character in fiction. And the fact, the
almost infinitely unlikely fact, of actually being Cézanne makes no

difference. For the consummate painter, with his little pipeline to Mind
at Large by-passing the brain valve and ego-filter, was also and just as
genuinely this whiskered goblin with the unfriendly eye.
For relief I turned back to the folds in my trousers. “This is how one
ought to see,” I repeated yet again. And I might have added, “These are
the sort of things one ought to look at.” Things without pretensions,
satisfied to be merely themselves, sufficient in their Suchness, not acting
a part, not trying, insanely, to go it alone, in isolation from the Dharma-
Body, in Luciferian defiance of the grace of God.
“The nearest approach to this,” I said, “would be a Vermeer.”
Yes, a Vermeer. For that mysterious artist was trebly gifted—with
the vision that perceives the Dharma-Body as the hedge at the bottom
of the garden, with the talent to render as much of that vision as the
limitations of human capacity permit, and with the prudence to confine
himself in his paintings to the more manageable aspects of reality; for
though Vermeer represented human beings, he was always a painter of
still life. Cézanne, who told his female sitters to do their best to look
like apples, tried to paint portraits in the same spirit. But his pippin-like
women are more nearly related to Plato’s Ideas than to the Dharma-
Body in the hedge. They are Eternity and Infinity seen, not in sand or
flower, but in the abstractions of some very superior brand of geometry.
Vermeer never asked his girls to look like apples. On the contrary, he
insisted on their being girls to the very limit—but always with the
proviso that they refrain from behaving girlishly. They might sit or
quietly stand but never giggle, never display self-consciousness, never
say their prayers or pine for absent sweethearts, never gossip, never
gaze enviously at other women’s babies, never flirt, never love or hate
or work. In the act of doing any of these things they would doubtless
become more intensely themselves, but would cease, for that very
reason, to manifest their divine essential Not-self. In Blake’s phrase, the
doors of Vermeer’s perception were only partially cleansed. A single
panel had become almost perfectly transparent; the rest of the door was
still muddy. The essential Not-self could be perceived very clearly in
things and in living creatures on the hither side of good and evil. In
human beings it was visible only when they were in repose, their minds
untroubled, their bodies motionless. In these circumstances Vermeer
could see Suchness in all its heavenly beauty—could see and, in some
small measure, render it in a subtle and sumptuous still life. Vermeer is
undoubtedly the greatest painter of human still lives. But there have
been others, for example, Vermeer’s French contemporaries, the Le Nain

brothers. They set out, I suppose, to be genre painters; but what they
actually produced was a series of human still lives, in which their
cleansed perception of the infinite significance of all things is rendered
not, as with Vermeer, by subtle enrichment of color and texture, but by
a heightened clarity, an obsessive distinctness of form, within an
austere, almost monochromatic tonality. In our own day we have had
Vuillard, the painter, at his best, of unforgettably splendid pictures of
the Dharma-Body manifested in a bourgeois bedroom, of the Absolute
blazing away in the midst of some stockbroker’s family in a suburban
garden, taking tea.
Ce qui fait que l’ancien bandagiste renie
Le comptoir dont le faste alléchait les passants,
C’est son jardin d’Auteuil, où veufs de tout encens,
Les Zinnias ont l’air d’être en tôle vernie.
For Laurent Tailhade the spectacle was merely obscene. But if the
retired rubber goods merchant had sat still enough, Vuillard would have
seen in him only the Dharma-Body, would have painted, in the zinnias,
the goldfish pool, the villa’s Moorish tower and Chinese lanterns, a
corner of Eden before the Fall.
But meanwhile my question remained unanswered. How was this
cleansed perception to be reconciled with a proper concern with human
relations, with the necessary chores and duties, to say nothing of charity
and practical compassion? The age-old debate between the actives and
the contemplatives was being renewed—re newed, so far as I was
concerned, with an unprecedented poignancy. For until this morning I
had known contemplation only in its humbler, its more ordinary forms
—as discursive thinking; as a rapt absorption in poetry or painting or
music; as a patient waiting upon those inspirations, without which even
the prosiest writer cannot hope to accomplish anything; as occasional
glimpses, in Nature, of Wordsworth’s “something far more deeply
interfused” as systematic silence leading, sometimes, to hints of an
“obscure knowledge.” But now I knew contemplation at its height. At its
height, but not yet in its fullness. For in its fullness the way of Mary
includes the way of Martha and raises it, so to speak, to its own higher
power. Mescalin opens up the way of Mary, but shuts the door on that
of Martha. It gives access to contemplation—but to a contemplation that
is incompatible with action and even with the will to action, the very

thought of action. In the intervals between his revelations the mescalin
taker is apt to feel that, though in one way everything is supremely as it
should be, in another there is something wrong. His problem is
essentially the same as that which confronts the quietist, the arhat and,
on another level, the landscape painter and the painter of human still
lives. Mescalin can never solve that problem; it can only pose it,
apocalyptically, for those to whom it had never before presented itself.
The full and final solution can be found only by those who are prepared
to implement the right kind of Weltanschauung by means of the right
kind of behavior and the right kind of constant and unstrained
alertness. Over against the quietist stands the active-contemplative, the
saint, the man who, in Eckhart’s phrase, is ready to come down from
the seventh heaven in order to bring a cup of water to his sick brother.
Over against the arhat, retreating from appearances into an entirely
transcendental Nirvana, stands the Bodhisattva, for whom Suchness and
the world of contingencies are one, and for whose boundless
compassion every one of those contingencies is an occasion not only for
transfiguring insight, but also for the most practical charity. And in the
universe of art, over against Vermeer and the other painters of human
still lives, over against the masters of Chinese and Japanese landscape
painting, over against Constable and Turner, against Sisley and Seurat
and Cézanne, stands the all-inclusive art of Rembrandt. These are
enormous names, inaccessible eminences. For myself, on this
memorable May morning, I could only be grateful for an experience
which had shown me, more clearly than I had ever seen it before, the
true nature of the challenge and the completely liberating response.
Let me add, before we leave this subject, that there is no form of
contemplation, even the most quietistic, which is without its ethical
values. Half at least of all morality is negative and consists in keeping
out of mischief. The Lord’s Prayer is less than fifty words long, and six
of those words are devoted to asking God not to lead us into temptation.
The one-sided contemplative leaves undone many things that he ought
to do; but to make up for it, he refrains from doing a host of things he
ought not to do. The sum of evil, Pascal remarked, would be much
diminished if men could only learn to sit quietly in their rooms. The
contemplative whose perception has been cleansed does not have to
stay in his room. He can go about his business, so completely satisfied
to see and be a part of the divine Order of Things that he will never
even be tempted to indulge in what Traherne called “the dirty Devices
of the world.” When we feel ourselves to be sole heirs of the universe,

when “the sea flows in our veins…and the stars are our jewels,” when
all things are perceived as infinite and holy, what motive can we have
for covetousness or self-assertion, for the pursuit of power or the
drearier forms of pleasure? Contemplatives are not likely to become
gamblers, or procurers, or drunkards; they do not as a rule preach
intolerance, or make war; do not find it necessary to rob, swindle or
grind the faces of the poor. And to these enormous negative virtues we
may add another which, though hard to define, is both positive and
important. The arhat and the quietist may not practice contemplation in
its fullness; but if they practice it at all, they may bring back
enlightening reports of another, a transcendent country of the mind;
and if they practice it in the height, they will become conduits through
which some beneficent influence can flow out of that other country into
a world of darkened selves, chronically dying for lack of it.
Meanwhile I had turned, at the investigator’s request, from the
portrait of Cézanne to what was going on, inside my head, when I shut
my eyes. This time, the inscape was curiously unrewarding. The field of
vision was filled with brightly colored, constantly changing structures
that seemed to be made of plastic or enameled tin.
“Cheap,” I commented. “Trivial. Like things in a five-and-ten.” And
all this shoddiness existed in a closed, cramped universe. “It’s as though
one were below decks in a ship,” I said. “A five-and-ten-cent ship.”
And as I looked, it became very clear that this five-and-ten-cent ship
was in some way connected with human pretensions, with the portrait
of Cézanne, with A.B. among the Dolomites overacting his favorite
character in fiction. This suffocating interior of a dime-store ship was
my own personal self; these gimcrack mobiles of tin and plastic were
my personal contributions to the universe.
I felt the lesson to be salutary, but was sorry, none the less, that it
had had to be administered at this moment and in this form. As a rule
the mescalin taker discovers an inner world as manifestly a datum, as
self-evidently “infinite and holy,” as that transfigured outer world
which I had seen with my eyes open. From the first, my own case had
been different. Mescalin had endowed me temporarily with the power
to see things with my eyes shut; but it could not, or at least on this
occasion did not, reveal an inscape remotely comparable to my flowers
or chair or flannels “out there.” What it had allowed me to perceive
inside was not the Dharma-Body, in images, but my own mind; not
Suchness, but a set of symbols—in other words, a homemade substitute
for Suchness.

Most visualizers are transformed by mescalin into visionaries. Some
of them—and they are perhaps more numerous than is generally
supposed—require no transformation; they are visionaries all the time.
The mental species to which Blake belonged is fairly widely distributed
even in the urban-industrial societies of the present day. The poet-
artist’s uniqueness does not consist in the fact that (to quote from his
Descriptive Catalogue) he actually saw “those wonderful originals called
in the Sacred Scriptures the Cherubim.” It does not consist in the fact
that “these wonderful originals seen in my visions, were some of them
one hundred feet in height…all containing mythological and recondite
meaning.” It consists solely in his ability to render, in words or
(somewhat less successfully) in line and color, some hint at least of a
not excessively uncommon experience. The untalented visionary may
perceive an inner reality no less tremendous, beautiful and significant
than the world beheld by Blake; but he lacks altogether the ability to
express, in literary or plastic symbols, what he has seen.
From the records of religion and the surviving monuments of poetry
and the plastic arts it is very plain that, at most times and in most
places, men have attached more importance to the inscape than to
objective existents, have felt that what they saw with their eyes shut
possessed a spiritually higher significance than what they saw with their
eyes open. The reason? Familiarity breeds contempt, and how to survive
is a problem ranging in urgency from the chronically tedious to the
excruciating. The outer world is what we wake up to every morning of
our lives, is the place where, willy-nilly, we must try to make our living.
In the inner world there is neither work nor monotony. We visit it only
in dreams and musings, and its strangeness is such that we never find
the same world on two successive occasions. What wonder, then, if
human beings in their search for the divine have generally preferred to
look within! Generally, but not always. In their art no less than in their
religion, the Taoists and the Zen Buddhists looked beyond visions to the
Void, and through the Void at “the ten thousand things” of objective
reality. Because of their doctrine of the Word made flesh, Christians
should have been able, from the first, to adopt a similar attitude
towards the universe around them. But because of the doctrine of the
Fall, they found it very hard to do so. As recently as three hundred
years ago an expression of thoroughgoing world denial and even world
condemnation was both orthodox and comprehensible. “We should feel
wonder at nothing at all in Nature except only the Incarnation of
Christ.” In the seventeenth century, Lallemant’s phrase seemed to make

sense. Today it has the ring of madness.
In China the rise of landscape painting to the rank of a major art
form took place about a thousand, in Japan about six hundred and in
Europe about three hundred, years ago. The equation of Dharma-Body
with hedge was made by those Zen Masters, who wedded Taoist
naturalism with Buddhist transcendentalism. It was, therefore, only in
the Far East that landscape painters consciously regarded their art as
religious. In the West religious painting was a matter of portraying
sacred personages, of illustrating hallowed texts. Landscape painters
regarded themselves as secularists. Today we recognize in Seurat one of
the supreme masters of what may be called mystical landscape painting.
And yet this man who was able, more effectively than any other, to
render the One in the many, became quite indignant when somebody
praised him for the “poetry” of his work. “I merely apply the System,”
he protested. In other words he was merely a pointilliste and, in his own
eyes, nothing else. A similar anecdote is told of John Constable. One
day towards the end of his life, Blake met Constable at Hampstead and
was shown one of the younger artist’s sketches. In spite of his contempt
for naturalistic art, the old visionary knew a good thing when he saw it
—except, of course, when it was by Rubens. “This is not drawing,” he
cried, “this is inspiration!” “I had meant it to be drawing,” was
Constable’s characteristic answer. Both men were right. It was drawing,
precise and veracious, and at the same time it was inspiration—
inspiration of an order at least as high as Blake’s. The pine trees on the
Heath had actually been seen as identical with the Dharma-Body. The
sketch was a rendering, necessarily imperfect but still profoundly
impressive, of what a cleansed perception had revealed to the open eyes
of a great painter. From a contemplation, in the tradition of
Wordsworth and Whitman, of the Dharma-Body as hedge, and from
visions, such as Blake’s, of the “wonderful originals” within the mind,
contemporary poets have retreated into an investigation of the personal,
as opposed to the more than personal, subconscious and to a rendering,
in highly abstract terms, not of the given, objective fact, but of mere
scientific and theological notions. And something similar has happened
in the field of painting, where we have witnessed a general retreat from
landscape, the predominant art form of the nineteenth century. This
retreat from landscape has not been into that other, inner divine Datum,
with which most of the traditional schools of the past were concerned,
that Archetypal World, where men have always found the raw materials
of myth and religion. No, it has been a retreat from the outward Datum

into the personal subconscious, into a mental world more squalid and
more tightly closed than even the world of conscious personality. These
contraptions of tin and highly colored plastic—where had I seen them
before? In every picture gallery that exhibits the latest in
nonrepresentational art.
And now someone produced a phonograph and put a record on the
turntable. I listened with pleasure, but experienced nothing comparable
to my seen apocalypses of flowers or flannel. Would a naturally gifted
musician hear the revelations which, for me, had been exclusively
visual? It would be interesting to make the experiment. Meanwhile,
though not transfigured, though retaining its normal quality and
intensity, the music contributed not a little to my understanding of what
had happened to me and of the wider problems which those happenings
had raised.
Instrumental music, oddly enough, left me rather cold. Mozart’s C-
Minor Piano Concerto was interrupted after the first movement, and a
recording of some madrigals by Gesualdo took its place.
“These voices,” I said appreciatively, “these voices—they’re a kind
of bridge back to the human world.”
And a bridge they remained even while singing the most startlingly
chromatic of the mad prince’s compositions. Through the uneven
phrases of the madrigals, the music pursued its course, never sticking to
the same key for two bars together. In Gesualdo, that fantastic character
out of a Webster melodrama, psychological disintegration had
exaggerated, had pushed to the extreme limit, a tendency inherent in
modal as opposed to fully tonal music. The resulting works sounded as
though they might have been written by the later Schoenberg.
“And yet,” I felt myself constrained to say, as I listened to these
strange products of a Counter-Reformation psychosis working upon a
late medieval art form, “and yet it does not matter that he’s all in bits.
The whole is disorganized. But each individual fragment is in order, is a
representative of a Higher Order. The Highest Order prevails even in
the disintegration. The totality is present even in the broken pieces.
More clearly present, perhaps, than in a completely coherent work. At
least you aren’t lulled into a sense of false security by some merely
human, merely fabricated order. You have to rely on your immediate
perception of the ultimate order. So in a certain sense disintegration
may have its advantages. But of course it’s dangerous, horribly
dangerous. Suppose you couldn’t get back, out of the chaos…”
From Gesualdo’s madrigals we jumped, across a gulf of three

centuries, to Alban Berg and the Lyric Suite.
“This,” I announced in advance, “is going to be hell.”
But, as it turned out, I was wrong. Actually the music sounded
rather funny. Dredged up from the personal subconscious, agony
succeeded twelve-tone agony; but what struck me was only the essential
incongruity between a psychological disintegration even completer than
Gesualdo’s and the prodigious resources, in talent and technique,
employed in its expression.
“Isn’t he sorry for himself!” I commented with a derisive lack of
sympathy. And then, “Katzenmusik—learned Katzenmusik.” And finally,
after a few more minutes of the anguish, “Who cares what his feelings
are? Why can’t he pay attention to something else?”
As a criticism of what is undoubtedly a very remarkable work, it
was unfair and inadequate—but not, I think, irrelevant. I cite it for what
it is worth and because that is how, in a state of pure contemplation, I
reacted to the Lyric Suite.
When it was over, the investigator suggested a walk in the garden. I
was willing; and though my body seemed to have dissociated itself
almost completely from my mind—or, to be more accurate, though my
awareness of the transfigured outer world was no longer accompanied
by an awareness of my physical organism—I found myself able to get
up, open the French window and walk out with only a minimum of
hesitation. It was odd, of course, to feel that “I” was not the same as
these arms and legs “out there,” as this wholly objective trunk and neck
and even head. It was odd; but one soon got used to it. And anyhow the
body seemed perfectly well able to look after itself. In reality, of course,
it always does look after itself. All that the conscious ego can do is to
formulate wishes, which are then carried out by forces which it controls
very little and understands not at all. When it does anything more—
when it tries too hard, for example, when it worries, when it becomes
apprehensive about the future—it lowers the effectiveness of those
forces and may even cause the devitalized body to fall ill. In my present
state, awareness was not referred to as ego; it was, so to speak, on its
own. This meant that the physiological intelligence controlling the body
was also on its own. For the moment that interfering neurotic who, in
waking hours, tries to run the show, was blessedly out of the way.
From the French window I walked out under a kind of pergola
covered in part by a climbing rose tree, in part by laths, one inch wide
with half an inch of space between them. The sun was shining and the
shadows of the laths made a zebra-like pattern on the ground and across

the seat and back of a garden chair, which was standing at this end of
the pergola. That chair—shall I ever forget it? Where the shadows fell
on the canvas upholstery, stripes of a deep but glowing indigo
alternated with stripes of an incandescence so intensely bright that it
was hard to believe that they could be made of anything but blue fire.
For what seemed an immensely long time I gazed without knowing,
even without wishing to know, what it was that confronted me. At any
other time I would have seen a chair barred with alternate light and
shade. Today the percept had swallowed up the concept. I was so
completely absorbed in looking, so thunderstruck by what I actually
saw, that I could not be aware of anything else. Garden furniture, laths,
sunlight, shadow—these were no more than names and notions, mere
verbalizations, for utilitarian or scientific purposes, after the event. The
event was this succession of azure furnace doors separated by gulfs of
unfathomable gentian. It was inexpressibly wonderful, wonderful to the
point, almost, of being terrifying. And suddenly I had an inkling of what
it must feel like to be mad. Schizophrenia has its heavens as well as its
hells and purgatories. I remember what an old friend, dead these many
years, told me about his mad wife. One day in the early stages of the
disease, when she still had her lucid intervals he had gone to talk to her
about their children. She listened for a time, then cut him short. How
could he bear to waste his time on a couple of absent children, when all
that really mattered, here and now, was the unspeakable beauty of the
patterns he made, in this brown tweed jacket, every time he moved his
arms? Alas, this paradise of cleansed perception, of pure one-sided
contemplation, was not to endure. The blissful intermissions became
rarer, became briefer, until finally there were no more of them; there
was only horror.
Most takers of mescalin experience only the heavenly part of
schizophrenia. The drug brings hell and purgatory only to those who
have had a recent case of jaundice, or who suffer from periodical
depressions or a chronic anxiety. If, like the other drugs of remotely
comparable power, mescalin were notoriously toxic, the taking of it
would be enough, of itself, to cause anxiety. But the reasonably healthy
person knows in advance that, so far as he is concerned, mescalin is
completely innocuous, that its effects will pass off after eight or ten
hours, leaving no hangover and consequently no craving for a renewal
of the dose. Fortified by this knowledge, he embarks upon the
experiment without fear—in other words, without any disposition to
convert an unprecedentedly strange and other than human experience

into something appalling, something actually diabolical.
Confronted by a chair which looked like the Last Judgment—or, to
be more accurate, by a Last Judgment which, after a long time and with
considerable difficulty, I recognized as a chair—I found myself all at
once on the brink of panic. This, I suddenly felt, was going too far. Too
far, even though the going was into intenser beauty, deeper
significance. The fear, as I analyze it in retrospect, was of being
overwhelmed, of disintegrating under a pressure of reality greater than
a mind, accustomed to living most of the time in a cosy world of
symbols, could possibly bear. The literature of religious experience
abounds in references to the pains and terrors overwhelming those who
have come, too suddenly, face to face with some manifestation of the
Mysterium tremendum. In theological language, this fear is due to the
incompatibility between man’s egotism and the divine purity, between
man’s self-aggravated separateness and the infinity of God. Following
Boehme and William Law, we may say that, by unregenerate souls, the
divine Light at its full blaze can be apprehended only as a burning,
purgatorial fire. An almost identical doctrine is to be found in The
Tibetan Book of the Dead, where the departed soul is described as
shrinking in agony from the Pure Light of the Void, and even from the
lesser, tempered Lights, in order to rush headlong into the comforting
darkness of selfhood as a reborn human being, or even as a beast, an
unhappy ghost, a denizen of hell. Anything rather than the burning
brightness of unmitigated Reality—anything!
The schizophrenic is a soul not merely unregenerate, but desperately
sick into the bargain. His sickness consists in the inability to take refuge
from inner and outer reality (as the sane person habitually does) in the
homemade universe of common sense—the strictly human world of
useful notions, shared symbols and socially acceptable conventions. The
schizophrenic is like a man permanently under the influence of
mescalin, and therefore unable to shut off the experience of a reality
which he is not holy enough to live with, which he cannot explain away
because it is the most stubborn of primary facts, and which, because it
never permits him to look at the world with merely human eyes, scares
him into interpreting its unremitting strangeness, its burning intensity
of significance, as the manifestations of human or even cosmic
malevolence, calling for the most desperate countermeasures, from
murderous violence at one end of the scale to catatonia, or
psychological suicide, at the other. And once embarked upon the
downward, the infernal road, one would never be able to stop. That,

now, was only too obvious.
“If you started in the wrong way,” I said in answer to the
investigator’s questions, “everything that happened would be a proof of
the conspiracy against you. It would all be self-validating. You couldn’t
draw a breath without knowing it was part of the plot.”
“So you think you know where madness lies?”
My answer was a convinced and heartfelt, “Yes.”
“And you couldn’t control it?”
“No I couldn’t control it. If one began with fear and hate as the
major premise, one would have to go on to the conclusion.”
“Would you be able,” my wife asked, “to fix your attention on what
The Tibetan Book of the Dead calls the Clear Light?”
I was doubtful.
“Would it keep the evil away, if you could hold it? Or would you
not be able to hold it?”
I considered the question for some time. “Perhaps,” I answered at
last, “perhaps I could—but only if there were somebody there to tell me
about the Clear Light. One couldn’t do it by oneself. That’s the point, I
suppose, of the Tibetan ritual—someone sitting there all the time and
telling you what’s what.”
After listening to the record of this part of the experiment, I took
down my copy of Evans-Wentz’s edition of The Tibetan Book of the Dead,
and opened at random. “O nobly born, let not thy mind be distracted.”
That was the problem—to remain undistracted. Undistracted by the
memory of past sins, by imagined pleasure, by the bitter aftertaste of
old wrongs and humiliations, by all the fears and hates and cravings
that ordinarily eclipse the Light. What those Buddhist monks did for the
dying and the dead, might not the modern psychiatrist do for the
insane? Let there be a voice to assure them, by day and even while they
are asleep, that in spite of all the terror, all the bewilderment and
confusion, the ultimate Reality remains unshakably itself and is of the
same substance as the inner light of even the most cruelly tormented
mind. By means of such devices as recorders, clock-controlled switches,
public address systems and pillow speakers it should be very easy to
keep the inmates of even an understaffed institution constantly
reminded of this primordial fact. Perhaps a few of the lost souls might
in this way be helped to win some measure of control over the universe
—at once beautiful and appalling, but always other than human, always
totally incomprehensible—in which they find themselves condemned to
live.

None too soon, I was steered away from the disquieting splendors of
my garden chair. Drooping in green parabolas from the hedge, the ivy
fronds shone with a kind of glassy, jade-like radiance. A moment later a
clump of Red Hot Pokers, in full bloom, had exploded into my field of
vision. So passionately alive that they seemed to be standing on the
very brink of utterance, the flowers strained upwards into the blue. Like
the chair under the laths, they protected too much. I looked down at the
leaves and discovered a cavernous intricacy of the most delicate green
lights and shadows, pulsing with undecipherable mystery.
Roses:
The flowers are easy to paint,
The leaves difficult.
Shiki’s haiku (which I quote in R. H. Blyth’s translation) expresses, by
indirection, exactly what I then felt—the excessive, the too obvious
glory of the flowers, as contrasted with the subtler miracle of their
foliage.
We walked out into the street. A large pale blue automobile was
standing at the curb. At the sight of it, I was suddenly overcome by
enormous merriment. What complacency, what an absurd self-
satisfaction beamed from those bulging surfaces of glossiest enamel!
Man had created the thing in his own image—or rather in the image of
his favorite character in fiction. I laughed till the tears ran down my
cheeks.
We re-entered the house. A meal had been prepared. Somebody,
who was not yet identical with myself, fell to with ravenous appetite.
From a considerable distance and without much interest, I looked on.
When the meal had been eaten, we got into the car and went for a
drive. The effects of the mescalin were already on the decline: but the
flowers in the gardens still trembled on the brink of being supernatural,
the pepper trees and carobs along the side streets still manifestly
belonged to some sacred grove. Eden alternated with Dodona. Yggdrasil
with the mystic Rose. And then, abruptly, we were at an intersection,
waiting to cross Sunset Boulevard. Before us the cars were rolling by in
a steady stream—thousands of them, all bright and shiny like an
advertiser’s dream and each more ludicrous than the last. Once again I
was convulsed with laughter.
The Red Sea of traffic parted at last, and we crossed into another

oasis of trees and lawns and roses. In a few minutes we had climbed to
a vantage point in the hills, and there was the city spread out beneath
us. Rather disappointingly, it looked very like the city I had seen on
other occasions. So far as I was concerned, transfig uration was
proportional to distance. The nearer, the more divinely other. This vast,
dim panorama was hardly different from itself.
We drove on, and so long as we remained in the hills, with view
succeeding distant view, significance was at its everyday level, well
below transfiguration point. The magic began to work again only when
we turned down into a new suburb and were gliding between two rows
of houses. Here, in spite of the peculiar hideousness of the architecture,
there were renewals of transcendental otherness, hints of the morning’s
heaven. Brick chimneys and green composition roofs glowed in the
sunshine, like fragments of the New Jerusalem. And all at once I saw
what Guardi had seen and (with what incomparable skill) had so often
rendered in his paintings—a stucco wall with a shadow slanting across
it, blank but unforgettably beautiful, empty but charged with all the
meaning and the mystery of existence. The revelation dawned and was
gone again within a fraction of a second. The car had moved on; time
was uncovering another manifestation of the eternal Suchness. “Within
sameness there is difference. But that difference should be different
from sameness is in no wise the intention of all the Buddhas. Their
intention is both totality and differentiation.” This bank of red and
white geraniums, for example—it was entirely different from that stucco
wall a hundred yards up the road. But the “is-ness” of both was the
same, the eternal quality of their transience was the same.
An hour later, with ten more miles and the visit to the World’s
Biggest Drug Store safely behind us, we were back at home, and I had
returned to that reassuring but profoundly unsatisfactory state known as
“being in one’s right mind.”
That humanity at large will ever be able to dispense with Artificial
Paradises seems very unlikely. Most men and women lead lives at the
worst so painful, at the best so monotonous, poor and limited that the
urge to escape, the longing to transcend themselves if only for a few
moments, is and has always been one of the principal appetites of the
soul. Art and religion, carnivals and saturnalia, dancing and listening to
oratory—all these have served, in H. G. Wells’s phrase, as Doors in the
Wall. And for private, for everyday use there have always been

chemical intoxicants. All the vegetable sedatives and narcotics, all the
euphorics that grow on trees, the hallucinogens that ripen in berries or
can be squeezed from roots—all, without exception, have been known
and systematically used by human beings from time immemorial. And
to these natural modifiers of consciousness modern science has added
its quota of synthetics—chloral, for example, and benzedrine, the
bromides and the barbiturates.
Most of these modifiers of consciousness cannot now be taken
except under doctor’s orders, or else illegally and at considerable risk.
For unrestricted use the West has permitted only alcohol and tobacco.
All the other chemical Doors in the Wall are labeled Dope, and their
unauthorized takers are Fiends.
We now spend a good deal more on drink and smoke than we spend
on education. This, of course, is not surprising. The urge to escape from
selfhood and the environment is in almost everyone almost all the time.
The urge to do something for the young is strong only in parents, and in
them only for the few years during which their children go to school.
Equally unsurprising is the current attitude towards drink and smoke. In
spite of the growing army of hopeless alcoholics, in spite of the
hundreds of thousands of persons annually maimed or killed by
drunken drivers, popular comedians still crack jokes about alcohol and
its addicts. And in spite of the evidence linking cigarettes with lung
cancer, practically everybody regards tobacco smoking as being hardly
less normal and natural than eating. From the point of view of the
rationalist utilitarian this may seem odd. For the historian, it is exactly
what you would expect. A firm conviction of the material reality of Hell
never prevented medieval Christians from doing what their ambition,
lust or covetousness suggested. Lung cancer, traffic accidents and the
millions of miserable and misery-creating alcoholics are facts even more
certain than was, in Dante’s day, the fact of the Inferno. But all such
facts are remote and unsubstantial compared with the near, felt fact of a
craving, here and now, for release or sedation, for a drink or a smoke.
Ours is the age, among other things, of the automobile and of
rocketing population. Alcohol is incompatible with safety on the roads,
and its production, like that of tobacco, condemns to virtual sterility
many millions of acres of the most fertile soil. The problems raised by
alcohol and tobacco cannot, it goes without saying, be solved by
prohibition. The universal and ever-present urge to self-transcendence is
not to be abolished by slamming the currently popular Doors in the
Wall. The only reasonable policy is to open other, better doors in the

hope of inducing men and women to exchange their old bad habits for
new and less harmful ones. Some of these other, better doors will be
social and technological in nature, others religious or psychological,
others dietetic, educational, athletic. But the need for frequent chemical
vacations from intolerable selfhood and repulsive surroundings will
undoubtedly remain. What is needed is a new drug which will relieve
and console our suffering species without doing more harm in the long
run than it does good in the short. Such a drug must be potent in
minute doses and synthesizable. If it does not possess these qualities, its
production, like that of wine, beer, spirits and tobacco will interfere
with the raising of indispensable food and fibers. It must be less toxic
than opium or cocaine, less likely to produce undesirable social
consequences than alcohol or the barbiturates, less inimical to heart and
lungs than the tars and nicotine of cigarettes. And, on the positive side,
it should produce changes in consciousness more interesting, more
intrinsically valuable than mere sedation or dreaminess, delusions of
omnipotence or release from inhibition.
To most people, mescalin is almost completely innocuous. Unlike
alcohol, it does not drive the taker into the kind of uninhibited action
which results in brawls, crimes of violence and traffic accidents. A man
under the influence of mescalin quietly minds his own business.
Moreover, the business he minds is an experience of the most
enlightening kind, which does not have to be paid for (and this is surely
important) by a compensatory hangover. Of the long-range
consequences of regular mescalin taking we know very little. The
Indians who consume peyote buttons do not seem to be physically or
moraily degraded by the habit. However, the available evidence is still
scarce and sketchy.*
Although obviously superior to cocaine, opium, alcohol and tobacco,
mescalin is not yet the ideal drug. Along with the happily transfigured
majority of mescalin takers there is a minority that finds in the drug
only hell or purgatory. Moreover, for a drug that is to be used, like
alcohol, for general consumption, its effects last for an inconveniently
long time. But chemistry and physiology are capable nowadays of
practically anything. If the psychologists and sociologists will define the
ideal, the neurologists and pharmacologists can be relied upon to
discover the means whereby that ideal can be realized or at least (for
perhaps this kind of ideal can never, in the very nature of things, be
fully realized) more nearly approached than in the wine-bibbing past,
the whisky-drinking, marijuana-smoking and barbiturate-swallowing

present.
The urge to transcend self-conscious selfhood is, as I have said, a
principal appetite of the soul. When, for whatever reason, men and
women fail to transcend themselves by means of worship, good works
and spiritual exercises, they are apt to resort to religion’s chemical
surrogates—alcohol and “goof pills” in the modern West, alcohol and
opium in the East, hashish in the Mohammedan world, alcohol and
marijuana in Central America, alcohol and coca in the Andes, alcohol
and the barbiturates in the more up-to-date regions of South America.
In Poisons Sacrés, Ivresses Divines Philippe de Félice has written at length
and with a wealth of documentation on the immemorial connection
between religion and the taking of drugs. Here, in summary or in direct
quotation, are his conclusions. The employment for religious purposes
of toxic substances is “extraordinarily widespread…. The practices
studied in this volume can be observed in every region of the earth,
among primitives no less than among those who have reached a high
pitch of civilization. We are therefore dealing not with exceptional
facts, which might justifiably be overlooked, but with a general and, in
the widest sense of the word, a human phenomenon, the kind of
phenomenon which cannot be disregarded by anyone who is trying to
discover what religion is, and what are the deep needs which it must
satisfy.”
Ideally, everyone should be able to find self-transcendence in some
form of pure or applied religion. In practice it seems very unlikely that
this hoped for consummation will ever be realized. There are, and
doubtless there always will be, good churchmen and good
churchwomen for whom, unfortunately, piety is not enough. The late G.
K. Chesterton, who wrote at least as lyrically of drink as of devotion,
may serve as their eloquent spokesman.
The modern churches, with some exceptions among the Protestant
denominations, tolerate alcohol; but even the most tolerant have made
no attempt to convert the drug to Christianity, or to sacramentalize its
use. The pious drinker is forced to take his religion in one compartment,
his religion-surrogate in another. And perhaps this is inevitable.
Drinking cannot be sacramentalized except in religions which set no
store on decorum. The worship of Dionysos or the Celtic god of beer
was a loud and disorderly affair. The rites of Christianity are
incompatible with even religious drunkenness. This does no harm to the
distillers, but is very bad for Christianity. Countless persons desire self-
transcendence and would be glad to find it in church. But, alas, “the

hungry sheep look up and are not fed.” They take part in rites, they
listen to sermons, they repeat prayers; but their thirst remains
unassuaged. Disappointed, they turn to the bottle. For a time at least
and in a kind of way, it works. Church may still be attended; but it is no
more than the Musical Bank of Butler’s Erewhon. God may still be
acknowledged; but He is God only on the verbal level, only in a strictly
Pickwickian sense. The effective object of worship is the bottle and the
sole religious experience is that state of uninhibited and belligerent
euphoria which follows the ingestion of the third cocktail.
We see, then, that Christianity and alcohol do not and cannot mix.
Christianity and mescalin seem to be much more compatible. This has
been demonstrated by many tribes of Indians, from Texas to as far north
as Wisconsin. Among these tribes are to be found groups affiliated with
the Native American Church, a sect whose principal rite is a kind of
Early Christian agape, or love feast, where slices of peyote take the
place of the sacramental bread and wine. These Native Americans
regard the cactus as God’s special gift to the Indians, and equate its
effects with the workings of the divine Spirit.
Professor J. S. Slotkin, one of the very few white men ever to have
participated in the rites of a Peyotist congregation, says of his fellow
worshipers that they are “certainly not stupefied or drunk…. They
never get out of rhythm or fumble their words, as a drunken or
stupefied man would do…. They are all quiet, courteous and
considerate of one another. I have never been in any white man’s house
of worship where there is either so much religious feeling or decorum.”
And what, we may ask, are these devout and well-behaved Peyotists
experiencing? Not the mild sense of virtue which sustains the average
Sunday churchgoer through ninety minutes of boredom. Not even those
high feelings, inspired by thoughts of the Creator and the Redeemer, the
Judge and the Comforter, which animate the pious. For these Native
Americans, religious experience is something more direct and
illuminating, more spontaneous, less the homemade product of the
superficial, self-conscious mind. Sometimes (according to the reports
collected by Dr. Slotkin) they see visions, which may be of Christ
Himself. Sometimes they hear the voice of the Great Spirit. Sometimes
they become aware of the presence of God and of those personal
shortcomings which must be corrected if they are to do His will. The
practical consequences of these chemical openings of doors into the
Other World seem to be wholly good. Dr. Slotkin reports that habitual
Peyotists are on the whole more industrious, more temperate (many of

them abstain altogether from alcohol), more peaceable than non-
Peyotists. A tree with such satisfactory fruits cannot be condemned out
of hand as evil.
In sacramentalizing the use of peyote, the Indians of the Native
American Church have done something which is at once psychologically
sound and historically respectable. In the early centuries of Christianity
many pagan rites and festivals were baptized, so to say, and made to
serve the purposes of the Church. These jollifications were not
particularly edifying; but they assuaged a certain psychological hunger
and, instead of trying to suppress them, the earlier missionaries had the
sense to accept them for what they were, soul-satisfying expressions of
fundamental urges, and to incorporate them into the fabric of the new
religion. What the Native Americans have done is essentially similar.
They have taken a pagan custom (a custom, incidentally, far more
elevating and enlightening than most of the rather brutish carousals and
mummeries adopted from European paganism) and given it a Christian
significance.
Though but recently introduced into the northern United States,
peyote-eating and the religion based upon it have become important
symbols of the red man’s right to spiritual independence. Some Indians
have reacted to white supremacy by becoming Americanized, others by
retreating into traditional Indianism. But some have tried to make the
best of both worlds, indeed of all the worlds—the best of Indianism, the
best of Christianity, and the best of those Other Worlds of
transcendental experience, where the soul knows itself as unconditioned
and of like nature with the divine. Hence the Native American Church.
In it two great appetites of the soul—the urge to independence and self-
determination and the urge to self-transcendence—were fused with, and
interpreted in the light of, a third—the urge to worship, to justify the
ways of God to man, to explain the universe by means of a coherent
theology.
Lo, the poor Indian, whose untutored mind
Clothes him in front, but leaves him bare behind.
But actually it is we, the rich and highly educated whites, who have left
ourselves bare behind. We cover our anterior nakedness with some
philosophy—Christian, Marxian, Freudo-Physicalist—but abaft we
remain uncovered, at the mercy of all the winds of circumstance. The

poor Indian, on the other hand, has had the wit to protect his rear by
supplementing the fig leaf of a theology with the breechclout of
transcendental experience.
I am not so foolish as to equate what happens under the influence of
mescalin or of any other drug, prepared or in the future preparable,
with the realization of the end and ultimate purpose of human life:
Enlightenment, the Beatific Vision. All I am suggesting is that the
mescalin experience is what Catholic theologians call “a gratuitous
grace,” not necessary to salvation but potentially helpful and to be
accepted thankfully, if made available. To be shaken out of the ruts of
ordinary perception, to be shown for a few timeless hours the outer and
the inner world, not as they appear to an animal obsessed with survival
or to a human being obsessed with words and notions, but as they are
apprehended, directly and unconditionally, by Mind at Large—this is an
experience of inestimable value to everyone and especially to the
intellectual. For the intellectual is by definition the man for whom, in
Goethe’s phrase, “the word is essentially fruitful.” He is the man who
feels that “what we perceive by the eye is foreign to us as such and need
not impress us deeply.” And yet, though himself an intellectual and one
of the supreme masters of language, Goethe did not always agree with
his own evaluation of the word. “We talk,” he wrote in middle life, “far
too much. We should talk less and draw more. I personally should like
to renounce speech altogether and, like organic Nature, communicate
everything I have to say in sketches. That fig tree, this little snake, the
cocoon on my window sill quietly awaiting its future—all these are
momentous signatures. A person able to decipher their meaning
properly would soon be able to dispense with the written or the spoken
word altogether. The more I think of it, there is something futile,
mediocre, even (I am tempted to say) foppish about speech. By contrast,
how the gravity of Nature and her silence startle you, when you stand
face to face with her, undistracted, before a barren ridge or in the
desolation of the ancient hills.” We can never dispense with language
and the other symbol systems; for it is by means of them, and only by
their means, that we have raised ourselves above the brutes, to the level
of human beings. But we can easily become the victims as well as the
beneficiaries of these systems. We must learn how to handle words
effectively; but at the same time we must preserve and, if necessary,
intensify our ability to look at the world directly and not through that
half opaque medium of concepts, which distorts every given fact into

the all too familiar likeness of some generic label or explanatory
abstraction.
Literary or scientific, liberal or specialist, all our education is
predominantly verbal and therefore fails to accomplish what it is
supposed to do. Instead of transforming children into fully developed
adults, it turns out students of the natural sciences who are completely
unaware of Nature as the primary fact of experience, it inflicts upon the
world students of the humanities who know nothing of humanity, their
own or anyone else’s.
Gestalt psychologists, such as Samuel Renshaw, have devised
methods for widening the range and increasing the acuity of human
perceptions. But do our educators apply them? The answer is, No.
Teachers in every field of psycho-physical skill, from seeing to
tennis, from tightrope walking to prayer, have discovered, by trial and
error, the conditions of optimum functioning within their special fields.
But have any of the great Foundations financed a project for co-
ordinating these empirical findings into a general theory and practice of
heightened creativeness? Again, so far as I am aware, the answer is, No.
All sorts of cultists and queer fish teach all kinds of techniques for
achieving health, contentment, peace of mind; and for many of their
hearers many of these techniques are demonstrably effective. But do we
see respectable psychologists, philosophers and clergymen boldly
descending into those odd and sometimes malodorous wells, at the
bottom of which poor Truth is so often condemned to sit? Yet once
more the answer is, No.
And now look at the history of mescalin research. Seventy years ago
men of first-rate ability described the transcendental experiences which
come to those who, in good health, under proper conditions and in the
right spirit, take the drug. How many philosophers, how many
theologians, how many professional educators have had the curiosity to
open this Door in the Wall? The answer, for all practical purposes, is,
None.
In a world where education is predominantly verbal, highly
educated people find it all but impossible to pay serious attention to
anything but words and notions. There is always money for, there are
always doctorates in, the learned foolery of research into what, for
scholars, is the all-important problem: Who influenced whom to say
what when? Even in this age of technology the verbal humanities are
honored. The non-verbal humanities, the arts of being directly aware of
the given facts of our existence, are almost completely ignored. A

catalogue, a bibliography, a definitive edition of a third-rate versifier’s
ipsissima verba, a stupendous index to end all indexes—any genuinely
Alexandrian project is sure of approval and financial support. But when
it comes to finding out how you and I, our children and grandchildren,
may become more perceptive, more intensely aware of inward and
outward reality, more open to the Spirit, less apt, by psychological
malpractices, to make ourselves physically ill, and more capable of
controlling our own autonomic nervous system—when it comes to any
form of non-verbal education more fundamental (and more likely to be
of some practical use) than Swedish drill, no really respectable person
in any really respectable university or church will do anything about it.
Verbalists are suspicious of the non-verbal; rationalists fear the given,
non-rational fact; intellectuals feel that “what we perceive by the eye
(or in any other way) is foreign to us as such and need not impress us
deeply.” Besides, this matter of education in the non-verbal humanities
will not fit into any of the established pigeonholes. It is not religion, not
neurology, not gymnastics, not morality or civics, not even
experimental psychology. This being so the subject is, for academic and
ecclesiastical purposes, non-existent and may safely be ignored
altogether or left, with a patronizing smile, to those whom the Pharisees
of verbal orthodoxy call cranks, quacks, charlatans and unqualified
amateurs.
“I have always found,” Blake wrote rather bitterly, “that Angels
have the vanity to speak of themselves as the only wise. This they do
with a confident insolence sprouting from systematic reasoning.”
Systematic reasoning is something we could not, as a species or as
individuals, possibly do without. But neither, if we are to remain sane,
can we possibly do without direct perception, the more unsystematic
the better, of the inner and outer worlds into which we have been born.
This given reality is an infinite which passes all understanding and yet
admits of being directly and in some sort totally apprehended. It is a
transcendence belonging to another order than the human, and yet it
may be present to us as a felt immanence, an experienced participation.
To be enlightened is to be aware, always, of total reality in its
immanent otherness—to be aware of it and yet to remain in a condition
to survive as an animal, to think and feel as a human being, to resort
whenever expedient to systematic reasoning. Our goal is to discover
that we have always been where we ought to be. Unhappily we make
the task exceedingly difficult for ourselves. Meanwhile, however, there
are gratuitous graces in the form of partial and fleeting realizations.

Under a more realistic, a less exclusively verbal system of education
than ours, every Angel (in Blake’s sense of that word) would be
permitted as a sabbatical treat, would be urged and even, if necessary,
compelled to take an occasional trip through some chemical Door in the
Wall into the world of transcendental experience. If it terrified him, it
would be unfortunate but probably salutary. If it brought him a brief
but timeless illumination, so much the better. In either case the Angel
might lose a little of the confident insolence sprouting from systematic
reasoning and the consciousness of having read all the books.
Near the end of his life Aquinas experienced Infused Contemplation.
Thereafter he refused to go back to work on his unfinished book.
Compared with this, everything he had read and argued about and
written—Aristotle and the Sentences, the Questions, the Propositions,
the majestic Summas—was no better than chaff or straw. For most
intellectuals such a sit-down strike would be inadvisable, even morally
wrong. But the Angelic Doctor had done more systematic reasoning
than any twelve ordinary Angels, and was already ripe for death. He
had earned the right, in those last months of his mortality, to turn away
from merely symbolic straw and chaff to the bread of actual and
substantial Fact. For Angels of a lower order and with better prospects
of longevity, there must be a return to the straw. But the man who
comes back through the Door in the Wall will never be quite the same
as the man who went out. He will be wiser but less cocksure, happier
but less self-satisfied, humbler in acknowledging his ignorance yet
better equipped to understand the relationship of words to things, of
systematic reasoning to the unfathomable Mystery which it tries,
forever vainly, to comprehend.

HEAVEN and HELL

In the history of science the collector of specimens
preceded the zoologist and followed the exponents of natural theology
and magic. He had ceased to study animals in the spirit of the authors
of the bestiaries, for whom the ant was incarnate industry, the panther
an emblem, surprisingly enough, of Christ, the polecat a shocking
example of uninhibited lasciviousness. But, except in a rudimentary
way, he was not yet a physiologist, ecologist or student of animal
behavior. His primary concern was to make a census, to catch, kill, stuff
and describe as many kinds of beasts as he could lay his hands on.
Like the earth of a hundred years ago, our mind still has its darkest
Africas, its unmapped Borneos and Amazonian basins. In relation to the
fauna of these regions we are not yet zoologists, we are mere naturalists
and collectors of specimens. The fact is unfortunate; but we have to
accept it, we have to make the best of it. However lowly, the work of
the collector must be done, before we can proceed to the higher
scientific tasks of classification, analysis, experiment and theory
making.
Like the giraffe and the duckbilled platypus, the creatures inhabiting
these remoter regions of the mind are exceedingly improbable.
Nevertheless they exist, they are facts of observation; and as such, they
cannot be ignored by anyone who is honestly trying to understand the
world in which he lives.
It is difficult, it is all but impossible, to speak of mental events
except in similes drawn from the more familiar universe of material
things. If I have made use of geographical and zoological metaphors, it
is not wantonly, out of a mere addiction to picturesque language. It is
because such metaphors express very forcibly the essential otherness of
the mind’s far continents, the complete autonomy and self-sufficiency of
their inhabitants. A man consists of what I may call an Old World of
personal consciousness and, beyond a dividing sea, a series of New
Worlds—the not too distant Virginias and Carolinas of the personal
subconscious and the vegetative soul; the Far West of the collective

unconscious, with its flora of symbols, its tribes of aboriginal
archetypes; and, across another, vaster ocean, at the antipodes of
everyday consciousness, the world of Visionary Experience.
If you go to New South Wales, you will see marsupials hopping
about the countryside. And if you go to the antipodes of the self-
conscious mind, you will encounter all sorts of creatures at least as odd
as kangaroos. You do not invent these creatures any more than you
invent marsupials. They live their own lives in complete independence.
A man cannot control them. All he can do is to go to the mental
equivalent of Australia and look around him.
Some people never consciously discover their antipodes. Others
make an occasional landing. Yet others (but they are few) find it easy to
go and come as they please. For the naturalist of the mind, the collector
of psychological specimens, the primary need is some safe, easy and
reliable method of transporting himself and others from the Old World
to the New, from the continent of familiar cows and horses to the
continent of a wallaby and the platypus.
Two such methods exist. Neither of them is perfect; but both are
sufficiently reliable, sufficiently easy and sufficiently safe to justify their
employment by those who know what they are doing. In the first case
the soul is transported to its far-off destination by the aid of a chemical
—either mescalin or lysergic acid. In the second case, the vehicle is
psychological in nature, and the passage to the mind’s antipodes is
accomplished by hypnosis. The two vehicles carry the consciousness to
the same region; but the drug has the longer range and takes its
passengers further into the terra incognita.*
How and why does hypnosis produce its observed effects? We do
not know. For our present purposes, however, we do not have to know.
All that is necessary, in this context, is to record the fact that some
hypnotic subjects are transported, in the trance state, to a region in the
mind’s antipodes, where they find the equivalent of marsupials—strange
psychological creatures leading an autonomous existence according to
the law of their own being.
About the physiological effects of mescalin we know a little.
Probably (for we are not yet certain) it interferes with the enzyme
system that regulates cerebral functioning. By doing so it lowers the
efficiency of the brain as an instrument for focusing the mind on the
problems of life on the surface of our planet. This lowering of what may
be called the biological efficiency of the brain seems to permit the entry
into consciousness of certain classes of mental events, which are

normally excluded, because they possess no survival value. Similar
intrusions of biologically useless, but aesthetically and sometimes
spiritually valuable material may occur as the result of illness or fatigue;
or they may be induced by fasting, or a period of confinement in a place
of darkness and complete silence.*
A person under the influence of mescalin or lysergic acid will stop
seeing visions when given a large dose of nicotinic acid. This helps to
explain the effectiveness of fasting as an inducer of visionary
experience. By reducing the amount of available sugar, fasting lowers
the brain’s biological efficiency and so makes possible the entry into
consciousness of material possessing no survival value. Moreover, by
causing a vitamin deficiency, it removes from the blood that known
inhibitor of visions, nicotinic acid. Another inhibitor of visionary
experience is ordinary, everyday, perceptual experience. Experimental
psychologists have found that, if you confine a man to a “restricted
environment,” where there is no light, no sound, nothing to smell and,
if you put him in a tepid bath, only one, almost imperceptible thing to
touch, the victim will very soon start “seeing things,” “hearing things”
and having strange bodily sensations.
Milarepa, in his Himalayan cavern, and the anchorites of the
Thebaid followed essentially the same procedure and got essentially the
same results. A thousand pictures of the Temptations of St. Anthony
bear witness to the effectiveness of restricted diet and restricted
environment. Asceticism, it is evident, has a double motivation. If men
and women torment their bodies, it is not only because they hope in
this way to atone for past sins and avoid future punishments; it is also
because they long to visit the mind’s antipodes and do some visionary
sightseeing. Empirically and from the reports of other ascetics, they
know that fasting and a restricted environment will transport them
where they long to go. Their self-inflicted punishment may be the door
to paradise. (It may also—and this is a point which will be discussed in
a later paragraph—be a door into the infernal regions.)
From the point of view of an inhabitant of the Old World,
marsupials are exceedingly odd. But oddity is not the same as
randomness. Kangaroos and wallabies may lack verisimilitude; but their
improbability repeats itself and obeys recognizable laws. The same is
true of the psychological creatures inhabiting the remoter regions of our
minds. The experiences encountered under the influence of mescalin or
deep hypnosis are very strange; but they are strange with a certain
regularity, strange according to a pattern.

What are the common features which this pattern imposes upon our
visionary experiences? First and most important is the experience of
light. Everything seen by those who visit the mind’s antipodes is
brilliantly illuminated and seems to shine from within. All colors are
intensified to a pitch far beyond anything seen in the normal state, and
at the same time the mind’s capacity for recognizing fine distinctions of
tone and hue is notably heightened.
In this respect there is a marked difference between these visionary
experiences and ordinary dreams. Most dreams are without color, or
else are only partially or feebly colored. On the other hand, the visions
met with under the influence of mescalin or hypnosis are always
intensely and, one might say, preternaturally brilliant in color. Professor
Calvin Hall, who has collected records of many thousands of dreams,
tells us that about two-thirds of all dreams are in black and white.
“Only one dream in three is colored, or has some color in it.” A few
people dream entirely in color; a few never experience color in their
dreams; the majority sometimes dream in color, but more often do not.
“We have come to the conclusion,” writes Dr. Hall, “that color in
dreams yields no information about the personality of the dreamer.” I
agree with this conclusion. Color in dreams and visions tells us no more
about the personality of the beholder than does color in the external
world. A garden in July is perceived as brightly colored. The perception
tells us something about sunshine, flowers and butterflies, but little or
nothing about our own selves. In the same way the fact that we see
brilliant colors in our visions and in some of our dreams tells us
something about the fauna of the mind’s antipodes, but nothing
whatever about the personality who inhabits what I have called the Old
World of the mind.
Most dreams are concerned with the dreamer’s private wishes and
instinctive urges, and with the conflicts which arise when these wishes
and urges are thwarted by a disapproving conscience or a fear of public
opinion. The story of these drives and conflicts is told in terms of
dramatic symbols, and in most dreams the symbols are uncolored. Why
should this be the case? The answer, I presume, is that, to be effective,
symbols do not require to be colored. The letters in which we write
about roses need not be red, and we can describe the rainbow by means
of ink marks on white paper. Textbooks are illustrated by line
engravings and half-tone plates; and these uncolored images and
diagrams effectively convey information.
What is good enough for the waking consciousness is evidently good

enough for the personal subconscious, which finds it possible to express
its meanings through uncolored symbols. Color turns out to be a kind of
touchstone of reality. That which is given is colored; that which our
symbol-creating intellect and fancy put together is uncolored. Thus the
external world is perceived as colored. Dreams, which are not given but
fabricated by the personal subconscious, are generally in black and
white. (It is worth remarking that, in most people’s experience, the most
brightly colored dreams are those of landscapes, in which there is no
drama, no symbolic reference to conflict, merely the presentation to
consciousness of a given, non-human fact.)
The images of the archetypal world are symbolic; but since we, as
individuals, do not fabricate them, but find them “out there” in the
collective unconscious, they exhibit some at least of the characteristics
of given reality and are colored. The non-symbolic inhabitants of the
mind’s antipodes exist in their own right, and like the given facts of the
external world are colored. Indeed, they are far more intensely colored
than external data. This may be explained, at least in part, by the fact
that our perceptions of the external world are habitually clouded by the
verbal notions in terms of which we do our thinking. We are forever
attempting to convert things into signs for the more intelligible
abstractions of our own invention. But in doing so, we rob these things
of a great deal of their native thinghood.
At the antipodes of the mind, we are more or less completely free of
language, outside the system of conceptual thought. Consequently our
perception of visionary objects possesses all the freshness, all the naked
intensity, of experiences which have never been verbalized, never
assimilated to lifeless abstractions. Their color (that hallmark of
givenness) shines forth with a brilliance which seems to us
preternatural, because it is in fact entirely natural—entirely natural in
the sense of being entirely unsophisticated by language or the scientific,
philosophical and utilitarian notions, by means of which we ordinarily
re-create the given world in our own drearily human image.
In his Candle of Vision, the Irish poet, Æ (George Russell), has
analyzed his visionary experiences with remarkable acuity. “When I
meditate,” he writes, “I feel in the thoughts and images that throng
about me the reflections of personality; but there are also windows in
the soul, through which can be seen images created not by human but
by the divine imagination.”
Our linguistic habits lead us into error. For example, we are apt to
say, “I imagine,” when what we should have said is, “The curtain was

lifted that I might see.” Spontaneous or induced, visions are never our
personal property. Memories belonging to the ordinary self have no
place in them. The things seen are wholly unfamiliar. “There is no
reference or resemblance,” in Sir William Herschel’s phrase, “to any
objects recently seen or even thought of.” When faces appear, they are
never the faces of friends or acquaintances. We are out of the Old
World, and exploring the antipodes.
For most of us most of the time, the world of everyday experience
seems rather dim and drab. But for a few people often, and for a fair
number occasionally, some of the brightness of visionary experience
spills over, as it were, into common seeing, and the everyday universe is
transfigured. Though still recognizably itself, the Old World takes on
the quality of the mind’s antipodes. Here is an entirely characteristic
description of this transfiguration of the everyday world:
“I was sitting on the seashore, half listening to a friend arguing
violently about something which merely bored me. Unconsciously to
myself, I looked at a film of sand I had picked up on my hand, when I
suddenly saw the exquisite beauty of every little grain of it; instead of
being dull, I saw that each particle was made up on a perfect
geometrical pattern, with sharp angles, from each of which a brilliant
shaft of light was reflected, while each tiny crystal shone like a
rainbow…. The rays crossed and recrossed, making exquisite patterns of
such beauty that they left me breathless…. Then, suddenly, my
consciousness was lighted up from within and I saw in a vivid way how
the whole universe was made up of particles of material which, no
matter how dull and lifeless they might seem, were nevertheless filled
with this intense and vital beauty. For a second or two the whole world
appeared as a blaze of glory. When it died down, it left me with
something I have never forgotten and which constantly reminds me of
the beauty locked up in every minute speck of material around us.”
Similarly George Russell writes of seeing the world illumined by “an
intolerable lustre of light” of finding himself looking at “landscapes as
lovely as a lost Eden” of beholding a world where the “colors were
brighter and purer, and yet made a softer harmony.” Again, “the winds
were sparkling and diamond clear, and yet full of color as an opal, as
they glittered through the valley, and I knew the Golden Age was all
about me, and it was we who had been blind to it, but that it had never
passed away from the world.”
Many similar descriptions are to be found in the poets and in the
literature of religious mysticism. One thinks, for example, of

Wordsworth’s Ode on the Intimations of Immortality in Childhood; of
certain lyrics by George Herbert and Henry Vaughan; of Traherne’s
Centuries of Meditation; of the passage in his autobiography, where
Father Surin describes the miraculous transformation of an enclosed
convent garden into a fragment of heaven.
Preternatural light and color are common to all visionary
experiences. And along with light and color there goes, in every case, a
recognition of heightened significance. The self-luminous objects which
we see in the mind’s antipodes possess a meaning, and this meaning is,
in some sort, as intense as their color. Significance here is identical with
being; for, at the mind’s antipodes, objects do not stand for anything but
themselves. The images which appear in the nearer reaches of the
collective subconscious have meaning in relation to the basic facts of
human experience; but here, at the limits of the visionary world, we are
confronted by facts which, like the facts of external nature, are
independent of man, both individually and collectively, and exist in
their own right. And their meaning consists precisely in this, that they
are intensely themselves and, being intensely themselves, are
manifestations of the essential givenness, the non-human otherness of
the universe.
Light, color and significance do not exist in isolation. They modify,
or are manifested by, objects. Are there any special classes of objects
common to most visionary experiences? The answer is: yes, there are.
Under mescalin and hypnosis, as well as in spontaneous visions, certain
classes of perceptual experiences turn up again and again.
The typical mescalin or lysergic-acid experience begins with
perceptions of colored, moving, living geometrical forms. In time, pure
geometry becomes concrete, and the visionary perceives, not patterns,
but patterned things, such as carpets, carvings, mosaics. These give
place to vast and complicated buildings, in the midst of landscapes,
which change continuously, passing from richness to more intensely
colored richness, from grandeur to deepening grandeur. Heroic figures,
of the kind that Blake called “The Seraphim,” may make their
appearance, alone or in multitudes. Fabulous animals move across the
scene. Everything is novel and amazing. Almost never does the
visionary see anything that reminds him of his own past. He is not
remembering scenes, persons or objects, and he is not inventing them;
he is looking on at a new creation.
The raw material for this creation is provided by the visual
experiences of ordinary life; but the molding of this material into forms

is the work of someone who is most certainly not the self, who
originally had the experiences, or who later recalled and reflected upon
them. They are (to quote the words used by Dr. J. R. Smythies in a
recent paper in the American Journal of Psychiatry) “the work of a highly
differentiated mental compartment, without any apparent connection,
emotional or volitional, with the aims, interests, or feelings of the
person concerned.”
Here, in quotation or condensed paraphrase, is Weir Mitchell’s
account of the visionary world to which he was transported by peyote,
the cactus which is the natural source of mescalin.
At his entry into that world he saw a host of “star points” and what
looked like “fragments of stained glass.” Then came “delicate floating
films of color.” These were displaced by an “abrupt rush of countless
points of white light,” sweeping across the field of vision. Next there
were zigzag lines of very bright colors, which somehow turned into
swelling clouds of still more brilliant hues. Buildings now made their
appearance, and then landscapes. There was a Gothic tower of elaborate
design with worn statues in the doorways or on stone brackets. “As I
gazed, every projecting angle, cornice and even the faces of the stones
at their joinings were by degrees covered or hung with clusters of what
seemed to be huge precious stones, but uncut stones, some being more
like masses of transparent fruit…. All seemed to possess an interior
light.” The Gothic tower gave place to a mountain, a cliff of
inconceivable height, a colossal bird claw carved in stone and
projecting over the abyss, an endless unfurling of colored draperies, and
an efflorescence of more precious stones. Finally there was a view of
green and purple waves breaking on a beach “with myriads of lights of
the same tint as the waves.”
Every mescalin experience, every vision arising under hypnosis, is
unique; but all recognizably belong to the same species. The landscapes,
the architectures, the clustering gems, the brilliant and intricate
patterns—these, in their atmosphere of preternatural light,
preternatural color and preternatural significance, are the stuff of which
the mind’s antipodes are made. Why this should be so, we have no idea.
It is a brute fact of experience which, whether we like it or not, we have
to accept—just as we have to accept the fact of kangaroos.
From these facts of visionary experience let us now pass to the
accounts preserved in all the cultural traditions, of Other Worlds—the
worlds inhabited by the gods, by the spirits of the dead, by man in his

primal state of innocence.
Reading these accounts, we are immediately struck by the close
similarity between induced or spontaneous visionary experience and the
heavens and fairylands of folklore and religion. Preternatural light,
preternatural intensity of coloring, preternatural significance—these are
characteristic of all the Other Worlds and Golden Ages. And in virtually
every case this preternaturally significant light shines on, or shines out
of, a landscape of such surpassing beauty that words cannot express it.
Thus in the Greco-Roman tradition we find the lovely Garden of the
Hesperides, the Elysian Plain, and the fair Island of Leuke, to which
Achilles was translated. Memnon went to another luminous island,
somewhere in the East. Odysseus and Penelope traveled in the opposite
direction and enjoyed their immortality with Circe in Italy. Still further
to the west were the Islands of the Blest, first mentioned by Hesiod and
so firmly believed in that, as late as the first century B.C., Sertorius
planned to send a squadron from Spain to discover them.
Magically lovely islands reappear in the folklore of the Celts and, at
the opposite side of the world, in that of the Japanese. And between
Avalon in the extreme West and Horaisan in the Far East, there is the
land of Uttarakuru, the Other World of the Hindus. “The land,” we read
in the Ramayana, “is watered by lakes with golden lotuses. There are
rivers by thousands, full of leaves of the color of sapphire and lapis
lazuli; and the lakes, resplendent like the morning sun, are adorned by
golden beds of red lotus. The country all around is covered by jewels
and precious stones, with gay beds of blue lotus, golden-petalled.
Instead of sand, pearls, gems and gold form the banks of the rivers,
which are overhung with trees of fire-bright gold. These trees
perpetually bear flowers and fruit, give forth a sweet fragrance and
abound with birds.”
Uttarakuru, we see, resembles the landscapes of the mescalin
experience in being rich with precious stones. And this characteristic is
common to virtually all the Other Worlds of religious tradition. Every
paradise abounds in gems, or at least in gemlike objects resembling, as
Weir Mitchell puts it, “transparent fruit.” Here, for example, is Ezekiel’s
version of the Garden of Eden. “Thou hast been in Eden, the garden of
God. Every precious stone was thy covering, the sardius, topaz and the
diamond, the beryl, the onyx and the jasper, the sapphire, the emerald
and the carbuncle, and gold…. Thou art the anointed cherub that
covereth…thou hast walked up and down in the midst of the stones of
fire.” The Buddhist paradises are adorned with similar “stones of fire.”

Thus, the Western Paradise of the Pure Land Sect is walled with silver,
gold and beryl; has lakes with jeweled banks and a profusion of glowing
lotuses, within which the bodhisattvas sit enthroned.
In describing their Other Worlds, the Celts and Teutons speak very
little of precious stones, but have much to say of another and, for them,
equally wonderful substance—glass. The Welsh had a blessed land
called Ynisvitrin, the Isle of Glass; and one of the names of the
Germanic kingdom of the dead was Glasberg. One is reminded of the
Sea of Glass in the Apocalypse.
Most paradises are adorned with buildings, and, like the trees, the
waters, the hills and fields, these buildings are bright with gems. We are
familiar with the New Jerusalem. “And the building of the wall of it was
of jasper, and the city was of pure gold, like unto clear glass…. And the
foundations of the wall of the city were garnished with all manner of
precious stones.”
Similar descriptions are to be found in the eschatological literature
of Hinduism, Buddhism and Islam. Heaven is always a place of gems.
Why should this be the case? Those who think of all human activities in
terms of a social and economic frame of reference will give some such
answer as this: Gems are very rare on earth. Few people possess them.
To compensate themselves for these facts, the spokesmen for the
poverty-stricken majority have filled their imaginary heavens with
precious stones. This “pie in the sky” hypothesis contains, no doubt,
some element of truth; but it fails to explain why precious stones should
have come to be regarded as precious in the first place.
Men have spent enormous amounts of time, energy and money on
the finding, mining and cutting of colored pebbles. Why? The utilitarian
can offer no explanation for such fantastic behavior. But as soon as we
take into account the facts of visionary experience, everything becomes
clear. In vision, men perceive a profusion of what Ezekiel calls “stones
of fire,” of what Weir Mitchell describes as “transparent fruit.” These
things are self-luminous, exhibit a preternatural brilliance of color and
possess a preternatural significance. The material objects which most
nearly resemble these sources of visionary illumination are gem stones.
To acquire such a stone is to acquire something whose preciousness is
guaranteed by the fact that it exists in the Other World.
Hence man’s otherwise inexplicable passion for gems and hence his
attribution to precious stones of therapeutic and magical virtue. The
causal chain, I am convinced, begins in the psychological Other World

of visionary experience, descends to earth and mounts again to the
theological Other World of heaven. In this context the words of
Socrates, in the Phaedo, take on a new significance. There exists, he tells
us, an ideal world above and beyond the world of matter. “In this other
earth the colors are much purer and much more brilliant than they are
down here…. The very mountains, the very stones have a richer gloss, a
lovelier transparency and intensity of hue. The precious stones of this
lower world, our highly prized cornelians, jaspers, emeralds and all the
rest, are but the tiny fragments of these stones above. In the other earth
there is no stone but is precious and exceeds in beauty every gem of
ours.”
In other words, precious stones are precious because they bear a
faint resemblance to the glowing marvels seen with the inner eye of the
visionary. “The view of that world,” says Plato, “is a vision of blessed
beholders” for to see things “as they are in themselves” is bliss
unalloyed and inexpressible.
Among people who have no knowledge of precious stones or of
glass, heaven is adorned not with minerals, but flowers. Preternaturally
brilliant flowers bloom in most of the Other Worlds described by
primitive eschatologists, and even in the begemmed and glassy
paradises of the more advanced religions they have their place. One
remembers the lotus of Hindu and Buddhist tradition, the roses and
lilies of the West.
“God first planted a garden.” The statement expresses a deep
psychological truth. Horticulture has its source—or at any rate one of its
sources—in the Other World of the mind’s antipodes. When worshipers
offer flowers at the altar, they are returning to the gods things which
they know, or (if they are not visionaries) obscurely feel, to be
indigenous to heaven.
And this return to the source is not merely symbolical; it is also a
matter of immediate experience. For the traffic between our Old World
and its antipodes, between Here and Beyond, travels along a two-way
street. Gems, for example, come from the soul’s visionary heaven; but
they also lead the soul back to that heaven. Contemplating them, men
find themselves (as the phrase goes) transported—carried away toward
that Other Earth of the Platonic dialogue, that magical place where
every pebble is a precious stone. And the same effects may be produced
by artifacts of glass and metal, by tapers burning in the dark, by
brilliantly colored images and ornaments; by flowers, shells and

feathers; by landscapes seen, as Shelley from the Euganean Hills saw
Venice, in the transfiguring light of dawn or sunset.
Indeed, we may risk a generalization and say that whatever, in
nature or in a work of art, resembles one of those intensely significant,
inwardly glowing objects encountered at the mind’s antipodes is
capable of inducing, if only in a partial and attenuated form, the
visionary experience. At this point a hypnotist will remind us that, if he
can be induced to stare intently at a shiny object, a patient may go into
trance; and that if he goes into trance, or if he goes only into reverie, he
may very well see visions within and a transfigured world without.
But how, precisely, and why does the view of a shiny object induce
a trance or a state of reverie? Is it, as the Victorians maintained, a
simple matter of eye strain resulting in general nervous exhaustion? Or
shall we explain the phenomenon in purely psychological terms—as
concentration pushed to the point of mono-ideism and leading to
dissociation?
And there is a third possibility. Shiny objects may remind our
unconscious of what it enjoys at the mind’s antipodes, and these
obscure intimations of life in the Other World are so fascinating that we
pay less attention to this world and so become capable of experiencing
consciously something of that which, unconsciously, is always with us.
We see then that there are in nature certain scenes, certain classes of
objects, certain materials, possessed of the power to transport the
beholder’s mind in the direction of its antipodes, out of the everyday
Here and toward the Other World of Vision. Similarly, in the realm of
art, we find certain works, even certain classes of works, in which the
same transporting power is manifest. These vision-inducing works may
be executed in vision-inducing materials, such as glass, metal, gems or
gemlike pigments. In other cases their power is due to the fact that they
render, in some peculiarly expressive way, some transporting scene or
object.
The best vision-inducing art is produced by men and women who
have themselves had the visionary experience; but it is also possible for
any reasonably good artist, simply by following an approved recipe, to
create works which shall have at least some transporting power.
Of all the vision-inducing arts that which depends most completely
on its raw materials is, of course, the art of the goldsmith and jeweler.
Polished metals and precious stones are so intrinsically transporting that
even a Victorian, even an art nouveau jewel is a thing of power. And
when to this natural magic of glinting metal and self-luminous stone is

added the other magic of noble forms and colors artfully blended, we
find ourselves in the presence of a genuine talisman.
Religious art has always and everywhere made use of these vision-
inducing materials. The shrine of gold, the chryselephantine statue, the
jeweled symbol or image, the glittering furniture of the altar—we find
these things in contemporary Europe as in ancient Egypt, in India and
China as among the Greeks, the Incas, the Aztecs.
The products of the goldsmith’s art are intrinsically numinous. They
have their place at the very heart of every Mystery, in every holy of
holies. This sacred jewelry has always been associated with the light of
lamps and candles. For Ezekiel, a gem was a stone of fire. Conversely, a
flame is a living gem, endowed with all the transporting power that
belongs to the precious stone and, to a lesser degree, to polished metal.
This transporting power of flame increases in proportion to the depth
and extent of the surrounding darkness. The most impressively
numinous temples are caverns of twilight, in which a few tapers give
life to the transporting, other-worldly treasures on the altar.
Glass is hardly less effective as an inducer of visions than are the
natural gems. In certain respects, indeed, it is more effective, for the
simple reason that there is more of it. Thanks to glass, a whole building
—the Sainte Chapelle, for example, the cathedrals of Chartres and Sens
—could be turned into something magical and transporting. Thanks to
glass, Paolo Uccello could design a circular jewel thirteen feet in
diameter—his great window of the Resurrection, perhaps the most
extraordinary single work of vision-inducing art ever produced.
For the men of the Middle Ages, it is evident, visionary experience
was supremely valuable. So valuable, indeed, that they were ready to
pay for it in hard-earned cash. In the twelfth century collecting boxes
were placed in the churches for the upkeep and installation of stained-
glass windows. Suger, the Abbot of St. Denis, tells us that they were
always full.
But self-respecting artists cannot be expected to go on doing what
their fathers have already done supremely well. In the fourteenth
century color gave place to grisaille, and windows ceased to be vision
inducing. When, in the later fifteenth century, color came into fashion
again, the glass painters felt the desire, and found themselves, at the
same time, technically equipped, to imitate Renaissance painting in
transparency. The results were often interesting; but they were not
transporting.

Then came the Reformation. The Protestants disapproved of
visionary experience and attributed a magical virtue to the printed
word. In a church with clear windows the worshipers could read their
Bibles and prayer books and were not tempted to escape from the
sermon into the Other World. On the Catholic side the men of the
Counter Reformation found themselves in two minds. They thought
visionary experience was a good thing, but they also believed in the
supreme value of print.
In the new churches stained glass was rarely installed, and in many
of the older churches it was wholly or partially replaced by clear glass.
The unobscured light permitted the faithful to follow the service in their
books, and at the same time to see the vision-inducing works created by
the new generations of baroque sculptors and architects. These
transporting works were executed in metal and polished stone.
Wherever the worshiper turned, he found the glint of bronze, the rich
radiance of colored marble, the unearthly whiteness of statuary.
On the rare occasions when the Counter Reformers made use of
glass, it was as a surrogate for diamonds, not for rubies or sapphires.
Faceted prisms entered religious art in the seventeenth century, and in
Catholic churches they dangle to this day from innumerable
chandeliers. (These charming and slightly ridiculous ornaments are
among the very few vision-inducing devices permitted in Islam.
Mosques have no images or reliquaries; but in the Near East, at any
rate, their austerity is sometimes mitigated by the transporting glitter of
rococo crystal.)
From glass, stained or cut, we pass to marble and the other stones
that take a high polish and can be used in mass. The fascination
exercised by such stones may be gauged by the amount of time and
trouble spent in obtaining them. At Baalbek, for example, and, two or
three hundred miles further inland, at Palmyra, we find among the
ruins columns of pink granite from Aswan. These great monoliths were
quarried in Upper Egypt, were floated in barges down the Nile, were
towed across the Mediterranean to Byblos or Tripolis and from thence
were hauled, by oxen, mules and men, uphill to Homs, and from Homs
southward to Baalbek, or east, across the desert, to Palmyra.
What a labor of giants! And, from the utilitarian point of view, how
marvelously pointless! But in fact, of course, there was a point—a point
that existed in a region beyond mere utility. Polished to a visionary
glow, the rosy shafts proclaimed their manifest kinship with the Other

World. At the cost of enormous efforts men had transported these stones
from their quarry on the Tropic of Cancer; and now, by way of
recompense, the stones were transporting their transporters halfway to
the mind’s visionary antipodes.
The question of utility and of the motives that lie beyond utility
arises once more in relation to ceramics. Few things are more useful,
more absolutely indispensable, than pots and plates and jugs. But at the
same time few human beings concern themselves less with utility than
do the collectors of porcelain and glazed earthenware. To say that these
people have an appetite for beauty is not a sufficient explanation. The
commonplace ugliness of the surroundings, in which fine ceramics are
so often displayed, is proof enough that what their owners crave is not
beauty in all its manifestations, but only a special kind of beauty—the
beauty of curved reflections, of softly lustrous glazes, of sleek and
smooth surfaces. In a word, the beauty that transports the beholder,
because it reminds him, obscurely or explicitly, of the preternatural
lights and colors of the Other World. In the main the art of the potter
has been a secular art—but a secular art which its innumerable devotees
have treated with an almost idolatrous reverence. From time to time,
however, this secular art has been placed at the service of religion.
Glazed tiles have found their way into mosques and, here and there,
into Christian churches. From China come shining ceramic images of
gods and saints. In Italy Luca della Robbia created a heaven of blue
glaze, for his lustrous white madonnas and Christ children. Baked clay
is cheaper than marble and, suitably treated, almost as transporting.
Plato and, during a later flowering of religious art, St. Thomas
Aquinas maintained that pure, bright colors were of the very essence of
artistic beauty. A Matisse, in that case, would be intrinsically superior
to a Goya or a Rembrandt. One has only to translate the philosophers’
abstractions into concrete terms to see that this equation of beauty in
general with bright, pure colors is absurd. But though untenable as it
stands, the venerable doctrine is not altogether devoid of truth.
Bright, pure colors are characteristic of the Other World.
Consequently works of art painted in bright, pure colors are capable, in
suitable circumstances, of transporting the beholder’s mind in the
direction of its antipodes. Bright pure colors are of the essence, not of
beauty in general, but only of a special kind of beauty, the visionary.
Gothic churches and Greek temples, the statues of the thirteenth
century after Christ and of the fifth century before Christ—all were
brilliantly colored.

For the Greeks and the men of the Middle Ages, this art of the
merry-go-round and the waxwork show was evidently transporting. To
us it seems deplorable. We prefer our Praxiteleses plain, our marble and
our limestone au naturel. Why should our modern taste be so different,
in this respect, from that of our ancestors? The reason, I presume, is
that we have become too familiar with bright, pure pigments to be
greatly moved by them. We admire them, of course, when we see them
in some grand or subtle composition; but in themselves and as such,
they leave us untransported.
Sentimental lovers of the past complain of the drabness of our age
and contrast it unfavorably with the gay brilliance of earlier times. In
actual fact, of course, there is a far greater profusion of color in the
modern than in the ancient world. Lapis lazuli and Tyrian purple were
costly rarities; the rich velvets and brocades of princely wardrobes, the
woven or painted hangings of medieval and early modern houses were
reserved for a privileged minority.
Even the great ones of the earth possessed very few of these vision-
inducing treasures. As late as the seventeenth century, monarchs owned
so little furniture that they had to travel from palace to palace with
wagonloads of plates and bedspreads, of carpets and tapestries. For the
great mass of the people there were only homespun and a few vegetable
dyes; and, for interior decoration, there were at best the earth colors, at
worst (and in most cases) “the floor of plaster and the walls of dung.”
At the antipodes of every mind lay the Other World of preternatural
light and preternatural color, of ideal gems and visionary gold. But
before every pair of eyes was only the dark squalor of the family hovel,
the dust or mud of the village street, the dirty whites, the duns and
goose-turd greens of ragged clothing. Hence a passionate, an almost
desperate thirst for bright, pure colors; and hence the overpowering
effect produced by such colors whenever, in church or at court, they
were displayed. Today the chemical industry turns out paints, inks and
dyes in endless variety and enormous quantities. In our modern world
there is enough bright color to guarantee the production of billions of
flags and comic strips, millions of stop signs and taillights, fire engines
and Coca-Cola containers by the hundred thousand, carpets, wallpapers
and non-representational art by the square mile.
Familiarity breeds indifference. We have seen too much pure, bright
color at Woolworth’s to find it intrinsically transporting. And here we
may note that, by its amazing capacity to give us too much of the best
things, modern technology has tended to devaluate the traditional

vision-inducing materials. The illumination of a city, for example, was
once a rare event, reserved for victories and national holidays, for the
canonization of saints and the crowning of kings. Now it occurs nightly
and celebrates the virtues of gin, cigarettes and toothpaste.
In London, fifty years ago, electric sky signs were a novelty and so
rare that they shone out of the misty darkness “like captain jewels in
the carcanet.” Across the Thames, on the old Shot Tower, the gold and
ruby letters were magically lovely—une féerie. Today the fairies are
gone. Neon is everywhere and, being everywhere, has no effect upon us,
except perhaps to make us pine nostalgically for primeval night.
Only in floodlighting do we recapture the unearthly significance
which used, in the age of oil and wax, even in the age of gas and the
carbon filament, to shine forth from practically any island of brightness
in the boundless dark. Under the searchlights Notre Dame de Paris and
the Roman Forum are visionary objects, having power to transport the
beholder’s mind toward the Other World.*
Modern technology has had the same devaluating effect on glass and
polished metal as it has had on fairy lamps and pure, bright colors. By
John of Patmos and his contemporaries walls of glass were conceivable
only in the New Jerusalem. Today they are a feature of every up-to-date
office, building and bungalow. And this glut of glass has been paralleled
by a glut of chrome and nickel, of stainless steel and aluminum and a
host of alloys old and new. Metal surfaces wink at us in the bathroom,
shine from the kitchen sink, go glittering across country in cars and
streamliners.
Those rich convex reflections, which so fascinated Rembrandt that
he never tired of rendering them in paint, are now the commonplaces of
home and street and factory. The fine point of seldom pleasure has been
blunted. What was once a needle of visionary delight has now become a
piece of disregarded linoleum.
I have spoken so far only of vision-inducing materials and their
psychological devaluation by modern technology. It is time now to
consider the purely artistic devices, by means of which vision-inducing
works have been created.
Light and color tend to take on a preternatural quality when seen in
the midst of environing darkness. Fra Angelico’s “Crucifixion” at the
Louvre has a black background. So have the frescoes of the Passion
painted by Andrea del Castagno for the nuns of Sant’ Appollonia at
Florence. Hence the visionary intensity, the strange transporting power

of these extraordinary works. In an entirely different artistic and
psychological context the same device was often used by Goya in his
etchings. Those flying men, that horse on the tightrope, the huge and
ghastly incarnation of Fear—all of them stand out, as though floodlit,
against a background of impenetrable night.
With the development of chiaroscuro, in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries, night came out of the background and installed
itself within the picture, which became the scene of a kind of
Manichean struggle between Light and Darkness. At the time they were
painted these works must have possessed a real transporting power. To
us, who have seen altogether too much of this kind of thing, most of
them seem merely theatrical. But a few still retain their magic. There is
Caravaggio’s “Entombment,” for example; there are a dozen magical
paintings by Georges de Latour;* there are all those visionary
Rembrandts where the lights have the intensity and significance of light
at the mind’s antipodes, where the darks are full of rich potentialities
waiting their turn to become actual, to make themselves glowingly
present to our consciousness.
In most cases the ostensible subject matter of Rembrandt’s pictures
is taken from real life or the Bible—a boy at his lessons or Bathsheba
bathing; a woman wading in a pond or Christ before His judges.
Occasionally, however, these messages from the Other World are
transmitted by means of a subject drawn, not from real life or history,
but from the realm of archetypal symbols. There hangs in the Louvre a
“Méditation du Philosophe,” whose symbolical subject matter is nothing
more nor less than the human mind, with its teeming darknesses, its
moments of intellectual and visionary illumination, its mysterious
stairways winding downward and upward into the unknown. The
meditating philosopher sits there in his island of inner illumination; and
at the opposite end of the symbolic chamber, in another, rosier island,
an old woman crouches before the hearth. The firelight touches and
transfigures her face, and we see, concretely illustrated, the impossible
paradox and supreme truth—that perception is (or at least can be,
ought to be) the same as Revelation, that Reality shines out of every
appearance, that the One is totally, infinitely present in all particulars.
Along with the preternatural lights and colors, the gems and the
ever-changing patterns, visitors to the mind’s antipodes discover a
world of sublimely beautiful landscapes, of living architecture and of
heroic figures. The transporting power of many works of art is
attributable to the fact that their creators have painted scenes, persons

and objects which remind the beholder of what, consciously or
unconsciously, he knows about the Other World at the back of his mind.
Let us begin with the human or, rather, the more than human
inhabitants of these far-off regions. Blake called them the Cherubim.
And in effect that is what, no doubt, they are—the psychological
originals of those beings who, in the theology of every religion, serve as
intermediaries between man and the Clear Light. The more than human
personages of visionary experience never “do anything.” (Similarly the
blessed never “do anything” in heaven.) They are content merely to
exist.
Under many names and attired in an endless variety of costumes,
these heroic figures of man’s visionary experience have appeared in the
religious art of every culture. Sometimes they are shown at rest,
sometimes in historical or mythological action. But action, as we have
seen, does not come naturally to the inhabitants of the mind’s
antipodes. To be busy is the law of our being. The law of theirs is to do
nothing. When we force these serene strangers to play a part in one of
our all too human dramas, we are being false to visionary truth. That is
why the most transporting (though not necessarily the most beautiful)
representation of “the Cherubim” are those which show them as they
are in their native habitat—doing nothing in particular.
And that accounts for the overwhelming, the more than merely
aesthetic impression made upon the beholder by the great static
masterpieces of religious art. The sculptured figures of Egyptian gods
and god-kings, the Madonnas and Pantocrators of the Byzantine
mosaics, the bodhisattvas, and lohans of China, the seated Buddhas of
Khmer, the steles and statues of Copán, the wooden idols of tropical
Africa—these have one characteristic in common: a profound stillness.
And it is precisely this which gives them their numinous quality, their
power to transport the beholder out of the old world of his everyday
experience, far away, toward the visionary antipodes of the human
psyche.
There is, of course, nothing intrinsically excellent about static art.
Static or dynamic, a bad piece of work is always a bad piece of work.
All I mean to imply is that, other things being equal, a heroic figure at
rest has a greater transporting power than one which is shown in
action.
The Cherubim live in Paradise and the New Jerusalem—in other
words, among prodigious buildings set in rich, bright gardens with
distant prospects of plain and mountain, of rivers and the sea. This is a

matter of immediate experience, a psychological fact which has been
recorded in folklore and the religious literature of every age and
country. It has not, however, been recorded in pictorial art.
Reviewing the succession of human cultures, we find that landscape
painting is either non-existent, or rudimentary, or of very recent
development. In Europe a full-blown art of landscape painting has
existed for only four or five centuries, in China for not more than a
thousand years, in India, for all practical purposes, never.
This is a curious fact that demands an explanation. Why should
landscapes have found their way into the visionary literature of a given
epoch and a given culture, but not into the painting? Posed in this way,
the question provides its own best answer. People may be content with
the merely verbal expression of this aspect of their visionary experience
and feel no need for its translation into pictorial terms.
That this often happens in the case of individuals is certain. Blake,
for example, saw visionary landscapes “articulated beyond all that the
mortal and perishing nature can produce” and “infinitely more perfect
and minutely organized than anything seen by the mortal eye.” Here is
the description of such a visionary landscape, which Blake gave at one
of Mrs. Aders’ evening parties: “The other evening, taking a walk, I
came to a meadow and at the further corner of it I saw a fold of lambs.
Coming nearer, the ground blushed with flowers, and the wattled cote
and its woolly tenants were of an exquisite pastoral beauty. But I looked
again, and it proved to be no living flock, but beautiful sculpture.”
Rendered in pigments, this vision would look, I suppose, like some
impossibly beautiful blending of one of Constable’s freshest oil sketches
with an animal painting in the magically realistic style of Zurbarán’s
haloed lamb now in the San Diego Museum. But Blake never produced
anything remotely resembling such a picture. He was content to talk
and write about his landscape visions, and to concentrate in his painting
upon “the Cherubim.”
What is true of an individual artist may be true of a whole school.
There are plenty of things which men experience, but do not choose to
express; or they may try to express what they have experienced, but in
only one of their arts. In yet other cases they will express themselves in
ways having no immediately recognizable affinity to the original
experience. In this last context Dr. A. K. Coomaraswamy has some
interesting things to say about the mystical art of the Far East—the art
where “denotation and connotation cannot be divided” and “no
distinction is felt between what a thing ‘is’ and what it ‘signifies.’”

The supreme example of such mystical art is the Zen-inspired
landscape painting which arose in China during the Sung period and
came to new birth in Japan four centuries later. India and the Near East
have no mystical landscape painting; but they have its equivalents
—“Vaisnava painting, poetry and music in India, where the theme is
sexual love; and Sufi poetry and music in Persia, devoted to praises of
intoxication.”*
“Bed,” as the Italian proverb succinctly puts it, “is the poor man’s
opera.” Analogously, sex is the Hindu’s Sung; wine, the Persian’s
Impressionism. The reason being, of course, that the experiences of
sexual union and intoxication partake of that essential otherness
characteristic of all vision, including that of landscapes.
If, at any time, men have found satisfaction in a certain kind of
activity, it is to be presumed that, at periods when this satisfying
activity was not manifested, there must have been some kind of
equivalent for it. In the Middle Ages, for example, men were
preoccupied in an obsessive, an almost maniacal way with words and
symbols. Everything in nature was instantly recognized as the concrete
illustration of some notion formulated in one of the books or legends
currently regarded as sacred.
And yet, at other periods of history men have found a deep
satisfaction in recognizing the autonomous otherness of nature,
including many aspects of human nature. The experience of this
otherness was expressed in terms of art, religion or science. What were
the medieval equivalents of Constable and ecology, of bird watching
and Eleusis, of microscopy and the rites of Dionysus and the Japanese
Haiku? They were to be found, I suspect, in Saturnalian orgies at one
end of the scale and in mystical experience at the other. Shrovetides,
May Days, Carnivals—these permitted a direct experience of the animal
otherness underlying personal and social identity. Infused
contemplation revealed the yet otherer otherness of the divine Not-Self.
And somewhere between the two extremes were the experiences of the
visionaries and the vision-inducing arts, by means of which it was
sought to recapture and re-create those experiences—the art of the
jeweler, of the maker of stained glass, of the weaver of tapestries, of the
painter, poet and musician.
In spite of a natural history that was nothing but a set of drearily
moralistic symbols, in the teeth of a theology which, instead of
regarding words as the signs of things, treated things and events as the
signs of Biblical or Aristotelian words, our ancestors remained relatively

sane. And they achieved this feat by periodically escaping from the
stifling prison of their bumptiously rationalistic philosophy, their
anthropomorphic, authoritarian and non-experimental science, their all
too articulate religion, into non-verbal, other than human worlds
inhabited by their instincts, by the visionary fauna of their mind’s
antipodes and, beyond and yet within all the rest, by the indwelling
Spirit.
From this wide-ranging but necessary digression, let us return to the
particular case from which we set out. Landscapes, as we have seen, are
a regular feature of the visionary experience. Descriptions of visionary
landscapes occur in the ancient literature of folklore and religion; but
paintings of landscapes do not make their appearance until
comparatively recent times. To what has been said, by way of
explanation about psychological equivalents, I will add a few brief notes
on the nature of landscape painting as a vision-inducing art.
Let us begin by asking a question. What landscapes—or, more
generally, what representations of natural objects—are most
transporting, most intrinsically vision inducing? In the light of my own
experience and of what I have heard other people say about their
reactions to works of art, I will risk an answer. Other things being equal
(for nothing can make up for lack of talent), the most transporting
landscapes are, first, those which represent natural objects a very long
way off, and, second, those which represent them at close range.
Distance lends enchantment to the view; but so does propinquity. A
Sung painting of faraway mountains, clouds and torrents is
transporting; but so are the close-ups of tropical leaves in the Douanier
Rousseau’s jungles. When I look at the Sung landscape, I am reminded
(or one of my not-I’s is reminded) of the crags, the boundless expanses
of plain, the luminous skies and seas of the mind’s antipodes. And those
disappearances into mist and cloud, those sudden emergences of some
strange, intensely definite form, a weathered rock, for example, an
ancient pine tree twisted by years of struggle with the wind—these too,
are transporting. For they remind me, consciously or unconsciously, of
the Other World’s essential alienness and unaccountability.
It is the same with the close-up. I look at those leaves with their
architecture of veins, their stripes and mottlings, I peer into the depths
of interlacing greenery, and something in me is reminded of those living
patterns, so characteristic of the visionary world, of those endless births
and proliferations of geometrical forms that turn into objects, of things
that are forever being transmuted into other things.

This painted close-up of a jungle is what, in one of its aspects, the
Other World is like, and so it transports me, it makes me see with eyes
that transfigure a work of art into something else, something beyond
art.
I remember—very vividly, though it took place many years ago—a
conversation with Roger Fry. We were talking about Monet’s “Water
Lilies.” They had no right, Roger kept insisting, to be so shockingly
unorganized, so totally without a proper compositional skeleton. They
were all wrong, artistically speaking. And yet, he had to admit, and
yet…. And yet, as I should now say, they were transporting. An artist of
astounding virtuosity had chosen to paint a close-up of natural objects
seen in their own context and without reference to merely human
notions of what’s what, or what ought to be what. Man, we like to say,
is the measure of all things. For Monet, on this occasion, water lilies
were the measure of water lilies; and so he painted them.
The same non-human point of view must be adopted by any artist
who tries to render the distant scene. How tiny, in the Chinese painting,
are the travelers who make their way along the valley! How frail the
bamboo hut on the slope above them! And all the rest of the vast
landscape is emptiness and silence. This revelation of the wilderness,
living its own life according to the laws of its own being, transports the
mind toward its antipodes; for primeval Nature bears a strange
resemblance to that inner world where no account is taken of our
personal wishes or even of the enduring concerns of man in general.
Only the middle distance and what may be called the remoter
foreground are strictly human. When we look very near or very far,
man either vanishes altogether or loses his primacy. The astronomer
looks even further afield than the Sung painter and sees even less of
human life. At the other end of the scale the physicist, the chemist, the
physiologist pursue the close-up—the cellular close-up, the molecular,
the atomic and sub-atomic. Of that which, at twenty feet, even at arm’s
length, looked and sounded like a human being no trace remains.
Something analogous happens to the myopic artist and the happy
lover. In the nuptial embrace personality is melted down; the individual
(it is the recurrent theme of Lawrence’s poems and novels) ceases to be
himself and becomes a part of the vast impersonal universe.
And so it is with the artist who chooses to use his eyes at the near
point. In his work humanity loses its importance, even disappears
completely. Instead of men and women playing their fantastic tricks
before high heaven, we are asked to consider the lilies, to meditate on

the unearthly beauty of “mere things,” when isolated from their
utilitarian context and rendered as they are, in and for themselves.
Alternatively (or, at an earlier stage of artistic development,
exclusively) the non-human world of the near point is rendered in
patterns. These patterns are abstracted for the most part from leaves
and flowers—the rose, the lotus, the acanthus, palm, papyrus—and are
elaborated, with recurrences and variations, into something
transportingly reminiscent of the living geometries of the Other World.
Freer and more realistic treatments of Nature at the near point make
their appearance at a relatively recent date—but far earlier than those
treatments of the distant scene, to which alone (and mistakenly) we
give the name of landscape painting. Rome, for example, had its close-
up landscapes. The fresco of a garden, which once adorned a room in
Livia’s villa, is a magnificent example of this form of art.
For theological reasons, Islam had to be content, for the most part,
with “arabesques”—luxuriant and (as in visions) continually varying
patterns, based upon natural objects seen at the near point. But even in
Islam the genuine close-up landscape was not unknown. Nothing can
exceed in beauty and in vision-inducing power the mosaics of gardens
and buildings in the great Omayyad mosque at Damascus.
In medieval Europe, despite the prevailing mania for turning every
datum into a concept, every immediate experience into a mere symbol
of something in a book, realistic close-ups of foliage and flowers were
fairly common. We find them carved on the capitals of Gothic pillars, as
in the Chapter House of Southwell Cathedral. We find them in paintings
of the chase—paintings whose subject was that ever-present fact of
medieval life, the forest, seen as the hunter or the strayed traveler sees
it, in all its bewildering intricacy of leafy detail.
The frescoes in the papal palace at Avignon are almost the sole
survivors of what, even in the time of Chaucer, was a widely practiced
form of secular art. A century later this art of the forest close-up came
to its self-conscious perfection in such magnificent and magical works
as Pisanello’s “St. Hubert” and Paolo Uccello’s “Hunt in a Wood,” now
in the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford. Closely related to the wall
paintings of forest close-ups were the tapestries, with which the rich
men of northern Europe adorned their houses. The best of these are
vision-inducing works of the highest order. In their own way they are as
heavenly, as powerfully reminiscent of what goes on at the mind’s
antipodes, as are the great masterpieces of landscape painting at the

farthest point—Sung mountains in their enormous solitude, Ming rivers
interminably lovely, the blue sub-Alpine world of Titian’s distances, the
England of Constable; the Italies of Turner and Corot; the Provences of
Cézanne and Van Gogh; the Île de France of Sisley and the Île de France
of Vuillard.
Vuillard, incidentally, was a supreme master both of the
transporting close-up and of the transporting distant view. His
bourgeois interiors are masterpieces of vision-inducing art, compared
with which the works of such conscious and so to say professional
visionaries as Blake and Odilon Redon seem feeble in the extreme. In
Vuillard’s interior every detail however trivial, however hideous even—
the pattern of the late Victorian wallpaper, the art nouveau bibelot, the
Brussels carpet—is seen and rendered as a living jewel; and all these
jewels are harmoniously combined into a whole which is a jewel of a
yet higher order of visionary intensity. And when the upper middle-
class inhabitants of Vuillard’s New Jerusalem go for a walk, they find
themselves not, as they had supposed, in the department of Seine-et-
Oise, but in the Garden of Eden, in an Other World which is yet
essentially the same as this world, but transfigured and therefore
transporting.*
I have spoken so far only of the blissful visionary experience and of
its interpretation in terms of theology, its translation into art. But
visionary experience is not always blissful. It is sometimes terrible.
There is hell as well as heaven.
Like heaven, the visionary hell has its preternatural light and its
preternatural significance. But the significance is intrinsically appalling
and the light is “the smoky light” of the Tibetan Book of the Dead, the
“darkness visible” of Milton. In the Journal d’une Schizophrène,* the
autobiographical record of a young girl’s passage through madness, the
world of the schizophrenic is called le Pays d’Éclairement—“the country
of lit-upness.” It is a name which a mystic might have used to denote
his heaven. But for poor Renée, the schizophrenic, the illumination is
infernal—an intense electric glare without a shadow, ubiquitous and
implacable. Everything that, for healthy visionaries, is a source of bliss
brings to Renée only fear and a nightmarish sense of unreality. The
summer sunshine is malignant; the gleam of polished surfaces is
suggestive not of gems, but of machinery and enameled tin; the
intensity of existence which animates every object, when seen at close
range and out of its utilitarian context, is felt as a menace.
And then there is the horror of infinity. For the healthy visionary,

the perception of the infinite in a finite particular is a revelation of
divine immanence; for Renée, it was a revelation of what she calls “the
System,” the vast cosmic mechanism which exists only to grind out guilt
and punishment, solitude and unreality.**
Sanity is a matter of degree, and there are plenty of visionaries, who
see the world as Renée saw it, but contrive, none the less, to live
outside the asylum. For them, as for the positive visionary, the universe
is transfigured—but for the worse. Everything in it, from the stars in the
sky to the dust under their feet, is unspeakably sinister or disgusting;
every event is charged with a hateful significance; every object
manifests the presence of an Indwelling Horror, infinite, all-powerful,
eternal.
This negatively transfigured world has found its way, from time to
time, into literature and the arts. It writhed and threatened in Van
Gogh’s later landscapes; it was the setting and the theme of all Kafka’s
stories; it was Géricault’s spiritual home;* it was inhabited by Goya
during the long years of his deafness and solitude; it was glimpsed by
Browning when he wrote Childe Roland; it had its place, over against
the theophanies, in the novels of Charles Williams.
The negative visionary experience is often accompanied by bodily
sensations of a very special and characteristic kind. Blissful visions are
generally associated with a sense of separation from the body, a feeling
of deindividualization. (It is, no doubt, this feeling of
deindividualization which makes it possible for the Indians who
practice the peyote cult to use the drug not merely as a short cut to the
visionary world, but also as an instrument for creating a loving
solidarity within the participating group.) When the visionary
experience is terrible and the world is transfigured for the worse,
individualization is intensified and the negative visionary finds himself
associated with a body that seems to grow progressively more dense,
more tightly packed, until he finds himself at last reduced to being the
agonized consciousness of an inspissated lump of matter, no bigger than
a stone that can be held between the hands.
It is worth remarking, that many of the punishments described in
the various accounts of hell are punishments of pressure and
constriction. Dante’s sinners are buried in mud, shut up in the trunks of
trees, frozen solid in blocks of ice, crushed beneath stones. The Inferno
is psychologically true. Many of its pains are experienced by
schizophrenics, and by those who have taken mescalin or lysergic acid
under unfavorable conditions.*

What is the nature of these unfavorable conditions? How and why is
heaven turned into hell? In certain cases the negative visionary
experience is the result of predominantly physical causes. Mescalin
tends, after ingestion, to accumulate in the liver. If the liver is diseased,
the associated mind may find itself in hell. But what is more important
for our present purposes is the fact that negative visionary experience
may be induced by purely psychological means. Fear and anger bar the
way to the heavenly Other World and plunge the mescalin taker into
hell.
And what is true of the mescalin taker is also true of the person who
sees visions spontaneously or under hypnosis. Upon this psychological
foundation has been reared the theological doctrine of saving faith—a
doctrine to be met with in all the great religious traditions of the world.
Eschatologists have always found it difficult to reconcile their
rationality and their morality with the brute facts of psychological
experience. As rationalists and moralists, they feel that good behavior
should be rewarded and that the virtuous deserve to go to heaven. But
as psychologists they know that virtue is not the sole or sufficient
condition of blissful visionary experience. They know that works alone
are powerless and that it is faith, or loving confidence, which
guarantees that visionary experience shall be blissful.
Negative emotions—the fear which is the absence of confidence, the
hatred, anger or malice which exclude love—are the guarantee that
visionary experience, if and when it comes, shall be appalling. The
Pharisee is a virtuous man; but his virtue is of the kind which is
compatible with negative emotion. His visionary experiences are
therefore likely to be infernal rather than blissful.
The nature of the mind is such that the sinner who repents and
makes an act of faith in a higher power is more likely to have a blissful
visionary experience than is the self-satisfied pillar of society with his
righteous indignations, his anxiety about possessions and pretensions,
his ingrained habits of blaming, despising and condemning. Hence the
enormous importance attached, in all the great religious traditions, to
the state of mind at the moment of death.
Visionary experience is not the same as mystical experience.
Mystical experience is beyond the realm of opposites. Visionary
experience is still within that realm. Heaven entails hell, and “going to
heaven” is no more liberation than is the descent into horror. Heaven is
merely a vantage point, from which the divine Ground can be more
clearly seen than on the level of ordinary individualized existence.

If consciousness survives bodily death, it survives, presumably, on
every mental level—on the level of mystical experience, on the level of
blissful visionary experience, on the level of infernal visionary
experience, and on the level of everyday individual existence. In life, as
we know by experience and observation, even the blissful visionary
experience tends to change its sign if it persists too long.
Many schizophrenics have their times of heavenly happiness; but the
fact that (unlike the mescalin taker) they do not know when, if ever,
they will be permitted to return to the reassuring banality of everyday
experience causes even heaven to seem appalling. But for those who, for
whatever reason, are appalled, heaven turns into hell, bliss into horror,
the Clear Light into the hateful glare of the land of lit-upness.
Something of the same kind may happen in the posthumous state.
After having had a glimpse of the unbearable splendor of ultimate
Reality, and after having shuttled back and forth between heaven and
hell, most souls find it possible to retreat into that more reassuring
region of the mind, where they can use their own and other people’s
wishes, memories and fancies to construct a world very like that in
which they lived on earth.
Of those who die an infinitesimal minority are capable of immediate
union with the divine Ground, a few are capable of supporting the
visionary bliss of heaven, a few find themselves in the visionary horrors
of hell and are unable to escape; the great majority end up in the kind
of world described by Swedenborg and the mediums. From this world it
is doubtless possible to pass, when the necessary conditions have been
fulfilled, to worlds of visionary bliss or the final enlightenment.
My own guess is that modern spiritualism and ancient tradition are
both correct. There is a posthumous state of the kind described in Sir
Oliver Lodge’s book Raymond; but there is also a heaven of blissful
visionary experience; there is also a hell of the same kind of appalling
visionary experience as is suffered here by schizophrenics and some of
those who take mescalin; and there is also an experience, beyond time,
of union with the divine Ground.

APPENDICES

I.
Two other, less effective aids to visionary experience
deserve mention—carbon dioxide and the stroboscopic lamp. A mixture
(completely non-toxic) of seven parts of oxygen and three of carbon
dioxide produces, in those who inhale it, certain physical and
psychological changes, which have been exhaustively described by
Meduna. Among these changes the most important, in our present
context, is a marked enhancement of the ability to “see things,” when
the eyes are closed. In some cases only swirls of patterned color are
seen. In others there may be vivid recalls of past experiences. (Hence
the value of CO2 as a therapeutic agent.) In yet other cases carbon
dioxide transports the subject to the Other World at the antipodes of his
everyday consciousness, and he enjoys very briefly visionary
experiences entirely unconnected with his own personal history or with
the problems of the human race in general.
In the light of these facts it becomes easy to understand the
rationale of yogic breathing exercises. Practiced systematically, these
exercises result, after a time, in prolonged suspensions of breath. Long
suspensions of breath lead to a high concentration of carbon dioxide in
the lungs and blood, and this increase in the concentration of CO2
lowers the efficiency of the brain as a reducing valve and permits the
entry into consciousness of experiences, visionary or mystical, from “out
there.”
Prolonged and continuous shouting or singing may produce similar,
but less strongly marked, results. Unless they are highly trained, singers
tend to breathe out more than they breathe in. Consequently the
concentration of carbon dioxide in the alveolar air and the blood is

increased and, the efficiency of the cerebral reducing valve being
lowered, visionary experience becomes possible. Hence the interminable
“vain repetitions” of magic and religion. The chanting of the curandero,
the medicine man, the shaman; the endless psalm singing and sutra
intoning of Christian and Buddhist monks; the shouting and howling,
hour after hour, of revivalists—under all the diversities of theological
belief and aesthetic convention, the psychochemico-physiological
intention remains constant. To increase the concentration of CO2 in the
lungs and blood and so to lower the efficiency of the cerebral reducing
valve, until it will admit biologically useless material from Mind-at-
Large—this, though the shouters, singers and mutterers did not know it,
has been at all times the real purpose and point of magic spells, of
mantrams, litanies, psalms and sutras. “The heart,” said Pascal, “has its
reasons.” Still more cogent and much harder to unravel are the reasons
of the lungs, the blood and the enzymes, of neurons and synapses. The
way to the superconscious is through the subconscious, and the way, or
at least one of the ways, to the subconscious is through the chemistry of
individual cells.
With the stroboscopic lamp we descend from chemistry to the still
more elementary realm of physics. Its rhythmically flashing light seems
to act directly, through the optic nerves, on the electrical manifestations
of the brain’s activity. (For this reason there is always a slight danger
involved in the use of the stroboscopic lamp. Some persons suffer from
petit mal without being made aware of the fact by any clear-cut and
unmistakable symptoms. Exposed to a stroboscopic lamp, such persons
may go into a full-blown epileptic fit. The risk is not very great; but it
must always be recognized. One case in eighty may turn out badly.)
To sit, with eyes closed, in front of a stroboscopic lamp is a very
curious and fascinating experience. No sooner is the lamp turned on
than the most brilliantly colored patterns make themselves visible.
These patterns are not static, but change incessantly. Their prevailing
color is a function of the stroboscope’s rate of discharge. When the lamp
is flashing at any speed between ten to fourteen or fifteen times a
second, the patterns are prevailingly orange and red. Green and blue
make their appearance when the rate exceeds fifteen flashes a second.
After eighteen or nineteen, the patterns become white and gray.
Precisely why we should see such patterns under the stroboscope is not
known. The most obvious explanation would be in terms of the
interference of two or more rhythms—the rhythm of the lamp and the
various rhythms of the brain’s electrical activity. Such interferences may

be translated by the visual center and optic nerves into something of
which the mind becomes conscious as a colored, moving pattern. Far
more difficult to explain is the fact, independently observed by several
experimenters, that the stroboscope tends to enrich and intensify the
visions induced by mescalin or lysergic acid. Here, for example, is a
case communicated to me by a medical friend. He had taken lysergic
acid and was seeing, with his eyes shut, only colored, moving patterns.
Then he sat down in front of a stroboscope. The lamp was turned on
and, immediately, abstract geometry was transformed into what my
friend described as “Japanese landscapes” of surpassing beauty. But
how on earth can the interference of two rhythms produce an
arrangement of electrical impulses interpretable as a living, self-
modulating Japanese landscape unlike anything the subject has ever
seen, suffused with preternatural light and color and charged with
preternatural significance?
This mystery is merely a particular case of a larger, more
comprehensive mystery—the nature of the relations between visionary
experience and events on the cellular, chemical and electrical levels. By
touching certain areas of the brain with a very fine electrode, Penfield
has been able to induce the recall of a long chain of memories relating
to some past experience. This recall is not merely accurate in every
perceptual detail; it is also accompanied by all the emotions which were
aroused by the events when they originally occurred. The patient, who
is under a local anesthetic, finds himself simultaneously in two times
and places—in the operating room, now, and in his childhood home,
hundreds of miles away and thousands of days in the past. Is there, one
wonders, some area in the brain from which the probing electrode
could elicit Blake’s Cherubim, or Weir Mitchell’s self-transformating
Gothic tower encrusted with living gems, or my friend’s unspeakably
lovely Japanese landscapes? And if, as I myself believe, visionary
experiences enter our consciousness from somewhere “out there” in the
infinity of Mind-at-Large, what sort of an ad hoc neurological pattern is
created for them by the receiving and transmitting brain? And what
happens to this ad hoc pattern when the vision is over? Why do all
visionaries insist on the impossibility of recalling, in anything even
faintly resembling its original form and intensity, their transfiguring
experiences? How many questions—and, as yet, how few answers!

II.
In the Western world, visionaries and mystics are a good deal less
common than they used to be. There are two principal reasons for this
state of affairs—a philosophical reason and a chemical reason. In the
currently fashionable picture of the universe there is no place for valid
transcendental experience. Consequently those who have had what they
regard as valid transcendental experiences are looked upon with
suspicion as being either lunatics or swindlers. To be a mystic or a
visionary is no longer creditable.
But it is not only our mental climate that is unfavorable to the
visionary and the mystic; it is also our chemical environment—an
environment profoundly different from that in which our forefathers
passed their lives.
The brain is chemically controlled, and experience has shown that it
can be made permeable to the (biologically speaking) superfluous
aspects of Mind-at-Large by modifying the (biologically speaking)
normal chemistry of the body.
For almost half of every year our ancestors ate no fruit, no green
vegetables and (since it was impossible for them to feed more than a
few oxen, cows, swine and poultry during the winter months) very little
butter or fresh meat, and very few eggs. By the beginning of each
successive spring, most of them were suffering, mildly or acutely, from
scurvy, due to lack of Vitamin C, and pellagra, caused by a shortage in
their diet of the B complex. The distressing physical symptoms of these
diseases are associated with no less distressing psychological
symptoms.* The nervous system is more vulnerable than the other
tissues of the body; consequently vitamin deficiencies tend to affect the
state of mind before they affect, at least in any very obvious way, the
skin, bones, mucous membranes, muscles and viscera. The first result of
an inadequate diet is a lowering of the efficiency of the brain as an
instrument for biological survival. The undernourished person tends to
be afflicted by anxiety, depression, hypochondria and feelings of

anxiety. He is also liable to see visions; for when the cerebral reducing
valve has its efficiency lowered, much (biologically speaking) useless
material flows into consciousness from “out there,” in Mind-at-Large.
Much of what the earlier visionaries experienced was terrifying. To
use the language of Christian theology, the Devil revealed himself in
their visions and ecstasies a good deal more frequently than did God. In
an age when vitamins were deficient and a belief in Satan universal,
this was not surprising. The mental distress, associated with even mild
cases of pellagra and scurvy, was deepened by fears of damnation and a
conviction that the powers of evil were omnipresent. This distress was
apt to tinge with its own dark coloring the visionary material, admitted
to consciousness through a cerebral valve whose efficiency had been
impaired by underfeeding. But in spite of their preoccupations with
eternal punishment and in spite of their deficiency disease, spiritually
minded ascetics often saw heaven and might even be aware,
occasionally, of that divinely impartial One in which the polar opposites
are reconciled. For a glimpse of beatitude, for a foretaste of unitive
knowledge, no price seemed too high. Mortification of the body may
produce a host of undesirable mental symptoms; but it may also open a
door into a transcendental world of Being, Knowledge and Bliss. That is
why, in spite of its obvious disadvantages, almost all aspirants to the
spiritual life have, in the past, undertaken regular courses of bodily
mortification.
So far as vitamins were concerned, every medieval winter was a
long involuntary fast, and this involuntary fast was followed, during
Lent, by forty days of voluntary abstinence. Holy Week found the
faithful marvelously well prepared, so far as their body chemistry was
concerned, for its tremendous incitements to grief and joy, for
seasonable remorse of conscious and a self-transcending identification
with the risen Christ. At this season of the highest religious excitement
and the lowest vitamin intake, ecstasies and visions were almost a
commonplace. It was only to be expected.
For cloistered contemplatives, there were several Lents in every
year. And even between fasts their diet was meager in the extreme.
Hence those agonies of depression and scrupulosity described by so
many spiritual writers; hence their frightful temptations to despair and
self-slaughter. But hence too those “gratuitous graces” in the form of
heavenly visions and locutions, of prophetic insights, of telepathic
“discernments of spirits.” And hence, finally, their “infused
contemplation,” their “obscure knowledge” of the One in all.

Fasting was not the only form of physical mortification resorted to
by the earlier aspirants to spirituality. Most of them regularly used upon
themselves the whip of knotted leather or even of iron wire. These
beatings were the equivalent of fairly extensive surgery without
anesthetics, and their effects on the body chemistry of the penitent were
considerable. Large quantities of histamine and adrenalin were released
while the whip was actually being plied; and when the resulting
wounds began to fester (as wounds practically always did before the age
of soap), various toxic substances, produced by the decomposition of
protein, found their way into the blood stream. But histamine produces
shock, and shock affects the mind no less profoundly than the body.
Moreover, large quantities of adrenalin may cause hallucinations, and
some of the products of its decomposition are known to induce
symptoms resembling those of schizophrenia. As for toxins from wounds
—these upset the enzyme systems regulating the brain, and lower its
efficiency as an instrument for getting on in a world where the
biologically fittest survive. This may explain why the Curé d’Ars used to
say that, in the days when he was free to flagellate himself without
mercy, God would refuse him nothing. In other words, when remorse,
self-loathing and the fear of hell release adrenalin, when self-inflicted
surgery releases adrenalin and histamine, and when infected wounds
release decomposed protein into the blood, the efficiency of the cerebral
reducing valve is lowered and unfamiliar aspects of Mind-at-Large
(including psi phenomena, visions and, if he is philosophically and
ethically prepared for it, mystical experiences) will flow into the
ascetic’s consciousness.
Lent, as we have seen, followed a long period of involuntary fasting.
Analogously, the effects of self-flagellation were supplemented, in
earlier times, by much involuntary absorption of decomposed protein.
Dentistry was non-existent, surgeons were executioners, and there were
no safe antiseptics. Most people, therefore, must have lived out their
lives with focal infections; and focal infections, though out of fashion as
the cause of all the ills that flesh is heir to, can certainly lower the
efficiency of the cerebral reducing valve.
And the moral of all this is—what? Exponents of a Nothing-But
philosophy will answer that, since changes in body chemistry can create
the conditions favorable to visionary and mystical experiences,
visionary and mystical experiences cannot be what they claim to be,
what, for those who have had them, they self-evidently are. But this, of
course, is a non sequitur.

A similar conclusion will be reached by those whose philosophy is
unduly “spiritual.” God, they will insist, is a spirit and is to be
worshiped in spirit. Therefore an experience which is chemically
conditioned cannot be an experience of the divine. But, in one way or
another, all our experiences are chemically conditioned, and if we
imagine that some of them are purely “spiritual,” purely “intellectual,”
purely “aesthetic,” it is merely because we have never troubled to
investigate the internal chemical environment at the moment of their
occurrence. Furthermore, it is a matter of historical record that most
contemplatives worked systematically to modify their body chemistry,
with a view to creating the internal conditions favorable to spiritual
insight. When they were not starving themselves into low blood sugar
and a vitamin deficiency, or beating themselves into intoxication by
histamine, adrenalin and decomposed protein, they were cultivating
insomnia and praying for long periods in uncomfortable positions in
order to create the psycho-physical symptoms of stress. In the intervals
they sang interminable psalms, thus increasing the amount of carbon
dioxide in the lungs and the blood stream, or, if they were Orientals,
they did breathing exercises to accomplish the same purpose. Today we
know how to lower the efficiency of the cerebral reducing valve by
direct chemical action, and without the risk of inflicting serious damage
on the psycho-physical organism. For an aspiring mystic to revert, in
the present state of knowledge, to prolonged fasting and violent self-
flagellation would be as senseless as it would be for an aspiring cook to
behave like Charles Lamb’s Chinaman, who burned down the house in
order to roast a pig. Knowing as he does (or at least as he can know, if
he so desires) what are the chemical conditions of transcendental
experience, the aspiring mystic should turn for technical help to the
specialists—in pharmacology, in biochemistry, in physiology and
neurology, in psychology and psychiatry, and parapsychology. And on
their part, of course, the specialists (if any of them aspire to be genuine
men of science and complete human beings) should turn, out of their
respective pigeonholes, to the artist, the sibyl, the visionary, the mystic
—all those, in a word, who have had experience of the Other World and
who know, in their different ways, what to do with that experience.

III.
Visionlike effects and vision-inducing devices have played a greater
part in popular entertainment than in the fine arts. Fireworks,
pageantry, theatrical spectacles—those are essentially visionary arts.
Unfortunately they are also ephemeral arts, whose earlier masterpieces
are known to us only by report. Nothing remains of all the Roman
triumphs, the medieval tournaments, the Jacobean masques, the long
succession of state entries and coronations, of royal marriages and
solemn decapitations, of canonizations and the funerals of Popes. The
best that can be hoped for such magnificences is that they may “live in
Settle’s numbers one day more.”
An interesting feature of these popular visionary arts is their close
dependence upon contemporary technology. Fireworks, for example,
were once no more than bonfires. (And to this day, I may add, a good
bonfire on a dark night remains one of the most magical and
transporting of spectacles. Looking at it, one can understand the
mentality of the Mexican peasant, who sets out to burn an acre of
woodland in order to plant his maize, but is delighted when, by a happy
accident, a square mile or two goes up in bright, apocalyptic flame.)
True pyrotechny began (in Europe at least, if not in China) with the use
of combustibles in sieges and naval battles. From war it passed, in due
course, to entertainment. Imperial Rome had its firework displays, some
of which, even in its decline, were elaborate in the extreme. Here is
Claudian’s description of the show put on by Manlius Theodorus in A.D.
399.
Mobile ponderibus descendat pegma reductis
inque chori speciem spargentes ardua flammas
scaena rotet varios, et fingat Mulciber orbis
per tabulas impune vagos pictaeque citato
ludent igne trabes, et non permissa morari
fida per innocuas errent incendia turres.

“Let the counterweights be removed,” Mr. Platnauer translates with a
straightforwardness of language that does less than justice to the
syntactical extravagances of the original, “and let the mobile crane
descend, lowering on to the lofty stage men who, wheeling chorus-wise,
scatter flames. Let Vulcan forge balls of fire to roll innocuously across
the boards. Let the flames appear to play about the sham beams of the
scenery and a tame conflagration, never allowed to rest, wander among
the untouched towers.”
After the fall of Rome, pyrotechny became, once more, exclusively a
military art. Its greatest triumph was the invention by Callinicus, about
A.D. 650, of the famous Greek Fire—the secret weapon which enabled a
dwindling Byzantine Empire to hold out for so long against its enemies.
With the Renaissance, fireworks re-entered the world of popular
entertainment. With every advance in the science of chemistry, they
became more and more brilliant. By the middle of the nineteenth
century pyrotechny had reached a peak of technical perfection and was
capable of transporting vast multitudes of spectators toward the
visionary antipodes of minds which, consciously, were respectable
Methodists, Puseyites, Utilitarians, disciples of Mill or Marx or Newman,
or Bradlaugh, or Samuel Smiles. In the Piazza del Popolo, at Ranelagh
and the Crystal Palace, on every Fourth and Fourteenth of July, the
popular subconscious was reminded by the crimson glare of strontium,
by copper blue and barium green and sodium yellow, of that Other
World, down under, in the psychological equivalent of Australia.
Pageantry is a visionary art which has been used, from time
immemorial, as a political instrument. The gorgeous fancy dress worn
by kings, popes and their respective retainers, military and
ecclesiastical, has a very practical purpose—to impress the lower classes
with a lively sense of their masters’ superhuman greatness. By means of
fine clothes and solemn ceremonies de facto domination is transformed
into a rule not merely de jure, but, positively, de jure divino. The crowns
and tiaras, the assorted jewelry, the satins, silks and velvets, the gaudy
uniforms and vestments, the crosses and medals, the sword hilts and the
crosiers, the plumes in the cocked hats and their clerical equivalents,
those huge feather fans which make every papal function look like a
tableau from Aïda—all these are vision-inducing properties, designed to
make all too human gentlemen and ladies look like heroes,
demigoddesses and seraphs, and giving, in the process, a great deal of
innocent pleasure to all concerned, actors and spectators alike.

In the course of the last two hundred years the technology of
artificial lighting has made enormous progress, and this progress has
contributed very greatly to the effectiveness of pageantry and the
closely related art of theatrical spectacle. The first notable advance was
made in the eighteenth century, with the introduction of molded
spermaceti candles in place of the older tallow dip and poured wax
taper. Next came the invention of Argand’s tubular wick, with an air
supply on the inner as well as the outer surface of the flame. Glass
chimneys speedily followed, and it became possible, for the first time in
history, to burn oil with a bright and completely smokeless light. Coal
gas was first employed as an illuminant in the early years of the
nineteenth century, and in 1825 Thomas Drummond found a practical
way of heating lime to incandescence by means of an oxygen-hydrogen
or oxygen-coal gas flame. Meanwhile parabolic reflectors for
concentrating light into a narrow beam had come into use. (The first
English lighthouse equipped with such a reflector was built in 1790.)
The influence on pageantry and theatrical spectacle of these
inventions was profound. In earlier times civic and religious ceremonies
could only take place during the day (and days were as often cloudy as
fine), or by the light, after sunset, of smoky lamps and torches or the
feeble twinkling of candles. Argand and Drummond, gas, limelight and,
forty years later, electricity made it possible to evoke, from the
boundless chaos of night, rich island universes, in which the glitter of
metal and gems, the sumptuous glow of velvets and brocades were
intensified to the highest pitch of what may be called intrinsic
significance. A recent example of ancient pageantry, raised by
twentieth-century lighting to a higher magical power, was the
coronation of Queen Elizabeth II. In the motion picture of the event, a
ritual of transporting splendor was saved from the oblivion, which, up
till now, has always been the fate of such solemnities, and preserved,
blazing preternaturally under the floodlights, for the delight of a vast
contemporary and future audience.
Two distinct and separate arts are practiced in the theater—the
human art of the drama and the visionary, other-world art of spectacle.
Elements of the two arts may be combined in a single evening’s
entertainment—the drama being interrupted (as so often happens in
elaborate productions of Shakespeare) to permit the audience to enjoy a
tableau vivant in which the actors either remain still or, if they move,
move only in a non-dramatic way, ceremonially, processionally or in a
formal dance. Our concern here is not with drama; it is with theatrical

spectacle, which is simply pageantry without its political or religious
overtones.
In the minor visionary arts of the costumier and the designer of
stage jewelry our ancestors were consummate masters. Nor, for all their
dependence on unassisted muscle power, were they far behind us in the
building and working of stage machinery, the contrivance of “special
effects.” In the masques of Elizabethan and early Stuart times, divine
descents and irruptions of demons from the cellarage were a
commonplace, so were apocalypses, so were the most amazing
metamorphoses. Enormous sums of money were lavished on these
spectacles. The Inns of Court, for example, put on a show for Charles I,
which cost more than twenty thousand pounds—at a date when the
purchasing power of the pound was six or seven times what it is today.
“Carpentry,” said Ben Jonson sarcastically, “is the soul of masque.”
His contempt was motivated by resentment. Inigo Jones was paid as
much for designing the scenery as was Ben for writing the libretto. The
outraged laureate had evidently failed to grasp the fact that masque is a
visionary art, and that visionary experience is beyond words (at any
rate beyond all but the most Shakespearean words) and is to be evoked
by direct, unmediated perceptions of things that remind the beholder of
what is going on at the unexplored antipodes of his own personal
consciousness. The soul of masque could never, in the very nature of
things, be a Jonsonian libretto; it had to be carpentry. But even
carpentry could not be the masque’s whole soul. When it comes to us
from within, visionary experience is always preternaturally brilliant.
But the early set designers possessed no manageable illuminant brighter
than a candle. At close range a candle can create the most magical
lights and contrasting shadows. The visionary paintings of Rembrandt
and Georges de Latour are of things and persons seen by candlelight.
Unfortunately light obeys the law of the inverse squares. At a safe
distance from an actor in inflammable fancy dress, candles are
hopelessly inadequate. At ten feet, for example, it would take one
hundred of the best wax tapers to produce an effective illumination of
one foot-candle. With such miserable lighting only a fraction of the
masque’s visionary potentialities could be made actual. Indeed, its
visionary potentialities were not fully realized until long after it had
ceased, in its original form, to exist. It was only in the nineteenth
century, when advancing technology had equipped the theater with
limelight and parabolic reflectors, that the masque came fully into its
own. Victoria’s reign was the heroic age of the so-called Christmas

pantomime and the fantastic spectacle. “Ali Baba,” “The King of the
Peacocks,” “The Golden Branch,” “The Island of Jewels”—their very
names are magical. The soul of that theatrical magic was carpentry and
dressmaking; its indwelling spirit, its scintilla animae, was gas and
limelight and, after the eighties, electricity. For the first time in the
history of the stage, beams of brightest incandescence transfigured the
painted backdrops, the costumes, the glass and pinchbeck of jewelry, so
that they became capable of transporting the spectators toward that
Other World, which lies at the back of every mind, however perfect its
adaptation to the exigencies of social life—even the social life of mid-
Victorian England. Today we are in the fortunate position of being able
to squander half a million horsepower on the nightly illumination of a
metropolis. And yet, in spite of this devaluation of artificial light,
theatrical spectacle still retains its old compelling magic. Embodied in
ballets, revues and musical comedies, the soul of masque goes marching
along. Thousand-watt lamps and parabolic reflectors project beams of
preternatural light, and preternatural light evokes, in everything it
touches, preternatural color and preternatural significance. Even the
silliest spectacle can be rather wonderful. It is a case of a New World
having been called in to redress the balance of the Old—of visionary art
making up for the deficiencies of all too human drama.
Athanasius Kircher’s invention—if his, indeed, it was—was
christened from the first Lanterna Magica. The name was everywhere
adopted as perfectly appropriate to a machine, whose raw material was
light, and whose finished product was a colored image emerging from
the darkness. To make the original magic lantern show yet more
magical, Kircher’s successors devised a number of methods for
imparting life and movement to the projected image. There were
“chrometropic” slides in which two painted glass disks could be made to
revolve in opposite directions, producing a crude but still effective
imitation of those perpetually changing three-dimensional patterns,
which have been seen by virtually everyone who has had a vision,
whether spontaneous or induced by drugs, fasting or the stroboscopic
lamp. Then there were those “dissolving views,” which reminded the
spectator of the metamorphoses going on incessantly at the antipodes of
his everyday consciousness. To make one scene turn imperceptibly into
another, two magic lanterns were used, projecting coincident images on
the screen. Each lantern was fitted with a shutter, so arranged that the
light of one could be progressively dimmed, while the light of the other
(originally completely obscured) was progressively brightened. In this

way the view projected by the first lantern was insensibly replaced by
the view projected by the second—to the delight and astonishment of
all beholders. Another device was the mobile magic lantern, projecting
its image on a semi-transparent screen, on the further side of which sat
the audience. When the lantern was wheeled close to the screen, the
projected image was very small. As it was withdrawn, the image
became progressively larger. An automatic focusing device kept the
changing images sharp and unblurred at all distances. The word
“phantasmagoria” was coined in 1802 by the inventors of this new kind
of peepshow.
All these improvements in the technology of magic lanterns were
contemporary with the poets and painters of the Romantic revival, and
may perhaps have exercised a certain influence on their choice of
subject matter and their methods of treating it. Queen Mab and The
Revolt of Islam, for example, are full of dissolving views and
phantasmagorias. Keat’s descriptions of scenes and persons, of interiors
and furniture and effects of light have the intense beamy quality of
colored images on a white sheet in a darkened room. John Martin’s
representations of Satan and Belshazzar, of Hell and Babylon and the
Deluge are manifestly inspired by lantern slides and tableaux vivants
dramatically illuminated by limelight.
The twentieth-century equivalent of the magic-lantern show is the
colored movie. In the huge, expensive “spectaculars,” the soul of
masque goes marching along—with a vengeance sometimes, but
sometimes also with taste and a real feeling for vision-inducing fantasy.
Moreover, thanks to advancing technology, the colored documentary
has proved itself, in skillful hands, a notable new form of popular
visionary art. The immensely magnified cactus blossoms, into which, at
the end of Disney’s The Living Desert, the spectator finds himself sinking,
come straight from the Other World. And then what transporting
visions, in the best of the nature films, of foliage in the wind, of the
textures of rock and sand, of the shadows and emerald lights in grass or
among the reeds, of birds and insects and four-footed creatures going
about their business in the underbrush or among the branches of forest
trees! Here are the magical close-up landscapes which fascinated the
makers of mille-feuille tapestries, the medieval painters of gardens and
hunting scenes. Here are the enlarged and isolated details of living
nature, out of which the artists of the Far East made some of the most
beautiful of their paintings.

And then there is what may be called the Distorted Documentary—a
new form of visionary art, admirably exemplified by Mr. Francis
Thompson’s film, NY, NY. In this very strange and beautiful picture we
see the city of New York as it appears when photographed through
multiplying prisms, or reflected in the backs of spoons, polished hub
caps, spherical and parabolic mirrors. We still recognize houses, people,
shop fronts, taxicabs, but recognize them as elements in one of those
living geometries which are so characteristic of the visionary
experience. The invention of this new cinematographic art seems to
presage (thank heaven!) the supersession and early demise of non-
representational painting. It used to be said by the non-
representationalists that colored photography had reduced the old-
fashioned portrait and the old-fashioned landscape to the rank of otiose
absurdities. This, of course, is completely untrue. Colored photography
merely records and preserves, in an easily reproducible form, the raw
materials with which portraitists and landscape painters work. Used as
Mr. Thompson has used it, colored cinematography does much more
than merely record and preserve the raw materials of non-
representational art; it actually turns out the finished product. Looking
at NY, NY, I was amazed to see that virtually every pictorial device
invented by the old masters of non-representational art and reproduced
ad nauseam by the academicians and mannerists of the school, for the
last forty years or more, makes its appearance, alive, glowing, intensely
significant, in the sequences of Mr. Thompson’s film.
Our ability to project a powerful beam of light has not only enabled
us to create new forms of visionary art; it has also endowed one of the
most ancient arts, the art of sculpture, with a new visionary quality
which it did not previously possess. I have spoken in an earlier
paragraph of the magical effects produced by the floodlighting of
ancient monuments and natural objects. Analogous effects are seen
when we turn the spotlights onto sculptured stone. Fuseli got the
inspiration for some of his best and wildest pictorial ideas by studying
the statues on Monte Cavallo by the light of the setting sun, or, better
still, when illuminated by lightning flashes at midnight. Today we
dispose of artificial sunsets and synthetic lightning. We can illuminate
our statues from whatever angle we choose, and with practically any
desired degree of intensity. Sculpture, in consequence, has revealed
fresh meanings and unsuspected beauties. Visit the Louvre one night
when the Greek and Egyptian antiquities are flood-lit. You will meet
with new gods, nymphs and Pharaohs; you will make the acquaintance,

as one spotlight goes out and another, in a different quarter of space, is
lit up, of a whole family of unfamiliar Victories of Samothrace.
The past is not something fixed and unalterable. Its facts are
rediscovered by every succeeding generation, its values reassessed, its
meanings redefined in the context of present tastes and preoccupations.
Out of the same documents and monuments and works of art, every
epoch invents its own Middle Ages, its private China, its patented and
copyrighted Hellas. Today, thanks to recent advances in the technology
of lighting, we can go one better than our predecessors. Not only have
we reinterpreted the great works of sculpture bequeathed to us by the
past, we have actually succeeded in altering the physical appearance of
these works. Greek statues, as we see them illuminated by a light that
never was on land or sea, and then photographed in a series of
fragmentary close-ups from the oddest angles, bear almost no
resemblance to the Greek statues seen by art critics and the general
public in the dim galleries and decorous engravings of the past. The aim
of the classical artist, in whatever period he may happen to live, is to
impart order to the chaos of experience, to present a comprehensible,
rational picture of reality, in which all the parts are clearly seen and
coherently related, so that the beholder knows (or, to be more accurate,
imagines that he knows) precisely what’s what. To us, this ideal of
rational orderliness makes no appeal. Consequently, when we are
confronted by works of classical art, we use all the means in our power
to make them look like something which they are not, and were never
meant to be. From a work, whose whole point is its unity of conception,
we select a single feature, focus our searchlights upon it and so force it,
out of all context, upon the observer’s consciousness. Where a contour
seems to us too continuous, too obviously comprehensible, we break it
up by alternating impenetrable shadows with patches of glaring
brightness. When we photograph a sculptured figure or group, we use
the camera to isolate a part, which we then exhibit in enigmatic
independence from the whole. By such means we can de-classicize the
severest classic. Subjected to the light treatment and photographed by
an expert cameraman, a Pheidias becomes a piece of Gothic
expressionism, a Praxiteles is turned into a fascinating surrealist object
dredged up from the ooziest depths of the subconscious. This may be
bad art history, but it is certainly enormous fun.

IV
Painter in ordinary, first to the Duke of his native Lorraine and later
to the King of France, Georges de Latour was treated, during his
lifetime, as the great artist he so manifestly was. With the accession of
Louis XIV and the rise, the deliberate cultivation, of a new art of
Versailles, aristocratic in subject matter and lucidly classical in style,
the reputation of this once famous man suffered an eclipse so complete
that, within a couple of generations, his very name had been forgotten,
and his surviving paintings came to be attributed to the Le Nains, to
Honthorst, to Zurbaran, to Murillo, even to Velazquez. The rediscovery
of Latour began in 1915 and was virtually complete by 1934, when the
Louvre organized a notable exhibition of “The Painters of Reality.”
Ignored for nearly three hundred years, one of the greatest of French
painters had come back to claim his rights.
Georges de Latour was one of those extroverted visionaries, whose
art faithfully reflects certain aspects of the outer world, but reflects
them in a state of transfigurement, so that every meanest particular
becomes intrinsically significant, a manifestation of the absolute. Most
of his compositions are of figures seen by the light of a single candle. A
single candle, as Caravaggio and the Spaniards had shown, can give rise
to the most enormous theatrical effects. But Latour took no interest in
theatrical effects. There is nothing dramatic in his pictures, nothing
tragic or pathetic or grotesque, no representation of action, no appeal to
the sort of emotions, which people go to the theater to have excited and
then appeased. His personages are essentially static. They never do
anything; they are simply there in the same way in which a granite
Pharaoh is there, or a bodhisattva from Khmer, or one of Piero’s flat-
footed angels. And the single candle is used, in every case, to stress this
intense but un-excited, impersonal thereness. By exhibiting common
things in an uncommon light, its flame makes manifest the living
mystery and inexplicable marvel of mere existence. There is so little
religiosity in the paintings that in many cases it is impossible to decide
whether we are confronted by an illustration to the Bible or a study of

models by candlelight. Is the “Nativity” at Rennes the nativity, or
merely a nativity? Is the picture of an old man asleep under the eyes of
a young girl merely that? Or is it of St. Peter in prison being visited by
the delivering angel? There is no way of telling. But though Latour’s art
is wholly without religiosity, it remains profoundly religious in the
sense that it reveals, with unexampled intensity, the divine
omnipresence.
It must be added that, as a man, this great painter of God’s
immanence seems to have been proud, hard, intolerably overbearing
and avaricious. Which goes to show, yet once more, that there is never
a one-to-one correspondence between an artist’s work and his character.

V.
At the near point Vuillard painted interiors for the most part, but
sometimes also gardens. In a few compositions he managed to combine
the magic of propinquity with the magic of remoteness by representing
a corner of a room in which there stands or hangs one of his own, or
someone else’s, representations of a distant view of trees, hills and sky.
It is an invitation to make the best of both worlds, the telescopic and
the microscopic, at a single glance.
For the rest, I can think of only a very few close-up landscapes by
modern European artists. There is a strange “Thicket” by Van Gogh at
the Metropolitan. There is Constable’s wonderful “Dell in Helmington
Park” at the Tate. There is a bad picture, Millais’s “Ophelia,” made
magical, in spite of everything, by its intricacies of summer greenery
seen from the point of view, very nearly, of a water rat. And I
remember a Delacroix, glimpsed long ago at some loan exhibition, of
bark and leaves and blossom at the closest range. There must, of course,
be others; but either I have forgotten, or have never seen them. In any
case there is nothing in the West comparable to the Chinese and
Japanese renderings of nature at the near point. A spray of blossoming
plum, eighteen inches of a bamboo stem with its leaves, tits or finches
seen at hardly more than arm’s length among the bushes, all kinds of
flowers and foliage, of birds and fish and small mammals. Each tiny life
is represented as the center of its own universe, the purpose, in its own
estimation, for which this world and all that is in it were created; each
issues its own specific and individual declaration of independence from
human imperialism; each, by ironic implication, derides our absurd
pretensions to lay down merely human rules for the conduct of the
cosmic game; each mutely repeats the divine tautology: I am that I am.
Nature at the middle distance is familiar—so familiar that we are
deluded into believing that we really know what it is all about. Seen
very close at hand, or at a great distance, or from an odd angle, it seems
disquietingly strange, wonderful beyond all comprehension. The close-
up landscapes of China and Japan are so many illustrations of the theme

that samsara and nirvana are one, that the Absolute is manifest in every
appearance. These great metaphysical, and yet pragmatic, truths were
rendered by the Zen-inspired artists of the Far East in yet another way.
All the objects of their near-point scrutiny were represented in a state of
unrelatedness against a blank of virgin silk or paper. Thus isolated,
these transient appearances take on a kind of absolute Thing-in-
Itselfhood. Western artists have used this device when painting sacred
figures, portraits and, sometimes, natural objects at a distance.
Rembrandt’s “Mill” and Van Gogh’s “Cypresses” are examples of long-
range landscapes in which a single feature has been absolutized by
isolation. The magical power of many of Goya’s etchings, drawings and
paintings can be accounted for by the fact that his compositions almost
always take the form of a few silhouettes, or even a single silhouette,
seen against a blank. These silhouetted shapes possess the visionary
quality of intrinsic significance, heightened by isolation and
unrelatedness to preternatural intensity. In nature, as in a work of art,
the isolation of an object tends to invest it with absoluteness, to endow
it with that more-than-symbolic meaning which is identical with being.
—But there’s a Tree—of many, one,
A single Field which I have looked upon,
Both of them speak of something that is gone.
The something which Wordsworth could no longer see was the
“visionary gleam.” That gleam, I remember, and that intrinsic
significance were the properties of a solitary oak that could be seen
from the train, between Reading and Oxford, growing from the summit
of a little knoll in a wide expanse of plowland, and silhouetted against
the pale northern sky.
The effects of isolation combined with proximity may be studied, in
all their magical strangeness, in an extraordinary painting by a
seventeenth-century Japanese artist, who was also a famous swordsman
and a student of Zen. It represents a butcherbird, perched on the very
tip of a naked branch, “waiting without purpose, but in the state of
highest tension.” Beneath, above and all around is nothing. The bird
emerges from the Void, from that eternal namelessness and
formlessness, which is yet the very substance of the manifold, concrete
and transient universe. That shrike on its bare branch is first cousin to
Hardy’s wintry thrush. But whereas the thrush insists on teaching us

some kind of a lesson, the Far Eastern butcherbird is content simply to
exist, to be intensely and absolutely there.

VI.
Many schizophrenics pass most of their time neither on earth, nor in
heaven, nor even in hell, but in a gray, shadowy world of phantoms and
unrealities. What is true of these psychotics is true, to a lesser extent, of
certain neurotics afflicted by a milder form of mental illness. Recently it
has been found possible to induce this state of ghostly existence by
administering a small quantity of one of the derivatives of adrenalin.
For the living, the doors of heaven, hell and limbo are opened, not by
“massy keys of metals twain,” but by the presence in the blood of one
set of chemical compounds and the absence of another set. The shadow
world inhabited by some schizophrenics and neurotics closely resembles
the world of the dead, as described in some of the earlier religious
traditions. Like the wraiths in Sheol and in Homer’s Hades, these
mentally disturbed persons have lost touch with matter, language and
their fellow beings. They have no purchase on life and are condemned
to ineffectiveness, solitude and a silence broken only by the senseless
squeak and gibber of ghosts.
The history of eschatological ideas marks a genuine progress—a
progress which can be described in theological terms as the passage
from Hades to Heaven, in chemical terms as the substitution of mescalin
and lysergic acid for adrenolutin, and in psychological terms as the
advance from catatonia and feelings of unreality to a sense of
heightened reality in vision and, finally, in mystical experience.

VII.
Géricault was a negative visionary; for though his art was almost
obsessively true to nature, it was true to a nature that had been
magically transfigured, in his perceiving and rendering of it, for the
worse. “I start to paint a woman,” he once said, “but it always ends up
as a lion.” More often, indeed, it ended up as something a good deal less
amiable than a lion—as a corpse, for example, as a demon. His
masterpiece, the prodigious “Raft of the Medusa,” was painted not from
life, but from dissolution and decay—from bits of cadavers supplied by
medical students, from the emaciated torso and jaundiced face of a
friend who was suffering from a disease of the liver. Even the waves on
which the raft is floating, even the overarching sky are corpse-colored.
It is as though the entire universe had become a dissecting room.
And then there are his demonic pictures. “The Derby,” it is obvious,
is being run in hell, against a background fairly blazing with darkness
visible. “The Horse Startled by Lightning,” in the National Gallery, is
the revelation, in a single frozen instant, of the strangeness, the sinister
and even infernal otherness that hides in familiar things. In the
Metropolitan Museum there is a portrait of a child. And what a child! In
his luridly brilliant jacket the little darling is what Baudelaire liked to
call “a budding Satan,” un Satan en herbe. And the study of a naked
man, also in the Metropolitan, is none other than the budding Satan
grown up.
From the acounts which his friends have left of him it is evident that
Géricault habitually saw the world about him as a succession of
visionary apocalypses. The prancing horse of his early “Officier de
Chasseurs” was seen one morning, on the road to Saint-Cloud, in a
dusty glare of summer sunshine, rearing and plunging between the
shafts of an omnibus. The personages in the “Raft of the Medusa” were
painted in finished detail, one by one, on the virgin canvas. There was
no outline drawing of the whole composition, no gradual building up of
an overall harmony of tones and hues. Each particular revelation—of a
body in decay, of a sick man in the ghastly extremity of hepatitis—was

fully rendered as it was seen and artistically realized. By a miracle of
genius, every successive apocalypse was made to fit, prophetically, into
a harmonious whole, which existed, when the earlier of the appalling
visions were transferred to canvas, only in the artist’s imagination.

VIII.
In Sartor Resartus Carlyle has left what (in Mr. Carlyle, My Patient)
his psychosomatic biographer, Dr. James Halliday, calls “an amazing
description of a psychotic state of mind, largely depressive, but partly
schizophrenic.”
“The men and women around me,” writes Carlyle, “even speaking
too with me, were but Figures; I had practically forgotten that they
were alive, that they were not merely automata. Friendship was but an
incredible tradition. In the midst of their crowded streets and
assemblages I walked solitary; and (except that it was my own heart,
not another’s, that I kept devouring) savage also as the tiger in the
jungle…. To me the Universe was all void of Life, of Purpose, of
Volition, even of Hostility; it was one huge, dead, immeasurable Steam-
Engine, rolling on in its dead indifference, to grind me limb from limb…
Having no hope, neither had I any definite fear, were it of Man or of
Devil. And yet, strangely enough, I lived in a continual, indefinite,
pining fear, tremulous, pusillanimous, apprehensive of I knew not what;
it seemed as if all things in the Heavens above, and the Earth beneath,
would hurt me; as if the Heavens and the Earth were but boundless jaws
of a devouring Monster, wherein I, palpitating, waited to be devoured.”
Renée and the idolater of heroes are evidently describing the same
experience. Infinity is apprehended by both, but in the form of “the
System,” the “immeasurable Steam-Engine.” To both, again, all is
significant, but negatively significant, so that every event is utterly
pointless, every object intensely unreal, every self-styled human being a
clockwork dummy, grotesquely going through the motions of work and
play, of loving, hating, thinking, of being eloquent, heroic, saintly, what
you will—the robots are nothing if not versatile.

P.S. Insights, Interviews & More…
About the author
Aldous Huxley: A Life of the Mind
About the book
Drugs That Shape Men’s Minds:
An Essay by Aldous Huxley
Read on
The Complete Aldous Huxley
Bibliography
Have You Read?
More by Aldous Huxley

About the author
Aldous Huxley
A Life of the Mind
POET, PLAYWRIGHT, NOVELIST, short story writer, travel writer, essayist,
critic, philosopher, mystic, and social prophet, Aldous Huxley was one
of the most accomplished and influential English literary figures of the
mid-twentieth century. In the course of an extraordinary prolific writing
career, which began in the early 1920s and continued until his death in
1963, Huxley underwent a remarkable process of self-transformation
from a derisive satirist of England’s chattering classes to a deeply
religious writer preoccupied with the human capacity for spiritual
transcendence. Yet in everything Huxley wrote, from the most frivolous
to the most profound, there runs the common thread of his search to
explain the meaning and possibilities of human life and perception.
Aldous Huxley was born in Surrey, England, in 1894, the son of
Leonard Huxley, editor of the prestigious Cornhill magazine; and of
Julia Arnold, niece of the poet and essayist Matthew Arnold, and sister
of Mrs. Humphrey Ward. He was the grandson of T. H. Huxley, the
scientist. Thus by “birth and disposition,” as one biographer put it,
Huxley belonged to England’s intellectual aristocracy.
As Sybille Bedford writes in her fascinating biography, Aldous
Huxley (Alfred A. Knopf / Harper & Row, 1974): “What we know about
him as a young child is the usual residue of anecdote and snapshot.
During his first years his head was proportionately enormous, so that he
could not walk till he was two because he was apt to topple over. ‘We
put father’s hat on him and it fitted.’ In another country, at a great
distance in time and place, when he lay ill and near his end in southern
California, a friend, wanting to distract him, said, ‘Aldous, didn’t you
ever have a nickname when you were small?’ and Aldous, who hardly

ever talked about his childhood or indeed about himself (possibly
because one did not ask) said promptly, ‘They called me Ogie. Short for
Ogre.’
“‘They called me Ogie. Short for Ogre.’”
“The Ogre was a pretty little boy, the photographs…show the high
forehead, the (then) clear gaze, the tremulous mouth and a sweetness of
expression, an alertness beyond that of other angelic little boys looking
into a camera. Aldous, his brother, Julian, tells us, sat quietly a good
deal of the time ‘contemplating the strangeness of things.’
“‘I used to watch him with a pencil,’ said his cousin and
contemporary Gervas Huxley, ‘you see, he was always drawing…. My
earliest memory of him is sitting—absorbed—to me it was magic, a
little boy of my own age drawing so beautifully.’
“He was delicate; he had mischievous moods; he could play. He
carried his rag doll about him for company until he was eight. He was
fond of grumbling. They gave him a milk mug which bore the
inscription: Oh, isn’t the world extremely flat / With nothing whatever to
grumble at.
“…And Aldous aged six being taken with all the Huxleys to the
unveiling of the statue of his grandfather at the Natural History
Museum by the Prince of Wales, and his mother trying, in urgent
whispers, to persuade Julian, then a young Etonian, to give up his top
hat—a very young Etonian and a very new top hat—to Aldous, queasy,
overcome, to be sick in.”
When Huxley was a sixteen-year-old student at Eton, he contracted a
disease that left him almost totally blind for two years and seriously
impaired his vision for years to come. The loss of sight was an “event,”
Huxley later wrote, “which prevented me from becoming a complete
public school English-gentleman.” It also ended his early dreams of
becoming a doctor. Yet, in a curious way, though he abandoned science
for literature, Huxley’s outlook remained essentially scientific. As his
brother, the zoologist Julian Huxley, wrote, science and mysticism were
overlapping and complementary realms in Aldous Huxley’s mind: “The
more [science] discovers and the more comprehension it gives us of the
mechanisms of existence, the more clearly does the mystery of existence
itself stand out.”
Huxley took his undergraduate degree in literature at Balliol

College, Oxford, in 1916, and spent several years during World War I
working in a government office. After teaching briefly at Eton, he
launched his career as a professional writer in 1920 by taking a job as a
drama critic for the Westminster Gazette, and a staff writer for House and
Garden and Vogue. Possessed of seemingly infinite literary energy, he
wrote poetry, essays, and fiction in his spare time, publishing his first
novel, Crome Yellow, in 1921. This bright, sharp, mildly shocking satire
of upper-class artists won Huxley an immediate reputation as a
dangerous wit. He swiftly composed several more novels in a similar
vein, including Antic Hay (1923) and Those Barren Leaves (1925).
In Point Counter Point (1928), considered by many critics his
strongest novel, Huxley broke new ground, both stylistically and
thematically. In a narrative that jumps abruptly from scene to scene and
character to character, Huxley confronts modern man’s disillusionment
with religion, art, sex, and politics. The character Philip Quarles, a
novelist intent on “transform[ing] a detached intellectual skepticism
into a way of harmonious all-round living,” is the closest Huxley came
to painting his own portrait in fiction. Brave New World (1932), though
less experimental in style than Point Counter Point, is more radical in its
pessimistic view of human nature. Huxley’s antiutopia, with its eerie
combination of totalitarian government and ubiquitous feel-good drugs
and sex, disturbed many readers of his day; but it has proven to be his
most enduring and influential work.
During the 1930s, Huxley turned increasingly toward an exploration
of fundamental questions of philosophy, sociology, politics, and ethics.
In his 1936 novel Eyeless in Gaza he wrote of a man’s transformation
from cynic to mystic, and as war threatened Europe once again, he
allied himself with the pacifist movement and began lecturing widely
on peace and internationalism.
For a number of years Huxley lived in Italy, where he formed a close
relationship with D. H. Lawrence, whose letters he edited in 1933. In
1937, Huxley and his Belgian-born wife, Maria Nys, and their son,
Matthew, left Europe to live in Southern California for the rest of his
life. Maria Huxley died of cancer in 1955, and the following year
Huxley married the Italian violinist and psychotherapist Laura Archera.
In the 1940s and 1950s, Huxley changed direction yet again as he
became fascinated by the spiritual life, in particular with the possibility
of direct communication between people and the divinity. Huxley read
widely in the writings of the mystics and assembled an anthology of

mystical writing called The Perennial Philosophy (1945). Around this
time he began experimenting with mind-altering drugs like mescaline
and LSD, which he came to believe gave users essentially the same
experiences that mystics attained through fasting, prayer, and
meditation. The Doors of Perception (1954) and Heaven and Hell (1956),
Huxley’s books about the effects of what he termed psychedelic drugs,
became essential texts for the counterculture during the 1960s. Yet
Huxley’s brother Julian cautions against the image of Aldous as a kind
of spiritual godfather to hippies: “One of Aldous’s major preoccupations
was how to achieve self-transcendence while yet remaining a committed
social being—how to escape from the prison bars of self and the
pressures of here and now into realms of pure goodness and pure
enjoyment.”
Huxley pursued his quest for “pure goodness and pure enjoyment”
right up to the end of his life on November 22, 1963. Today he is
remembered as one of the great explorers of twentieth-century
literature, a writer who continually reinvented himself as he pushed his
way deeper and deeper into the mysteries of human consciousness.
Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information on your
favorite HarperCollins author.

About the book
Drugs That Shape Men’s Minds
An Essay by Aldous Huxley
IN THE COURSE OF HISTORY many more people have died for their drink
and their dope than have died for their religion or their country. The
craving for ethyl alcohol and the opiates has been stronger, in these
millions, than the love of God, of home, of children; even of life. Their
cry was not for liberty or death; it was for death preceded by
enslavement. There is a paradox here, and a mystery. Why should such
multitudes of men and women be so ready to sacrifice themselves for a
cause so utterly hopeless and in ways so painful and so profoundly
humiliating?
To this riddle there is, of course, no simple or single answer. Human
beings are immensely complicated creatures, living simultaneously in a
half dozen different worlds. Each individual is unique and, in a number
of respects, unlike all the other members of the species. None of our
motives is unmixed, none of our actions can be traced back to a single
source and, in any group we care to study, behavior patterns that are
observably similar may be the result of many constellations of dissimilar
causes.
Thus, there are some alcoholics who seem to have been
biochemically predestined to alcoholism. (Among rats, as Prof. Roger
Williams, of the University of Texas, has shown, some are born
drunkards; some are born teetotalers and will never touch the stuff.)
Other alcoholics have been foredoomed not by some inherited defect in
their biochemical make-up, but by their neurotic reactions to distressing
events in their childhood or adolescence. Again, others embark upon
their course of slow suicide as a result of mere imitation and good
fellowship because they have made such an “excellent adjustment to
their group”—a process which, if the group happens to be criminal,

idiotic or merely ignorant, can bring only disaster to the well-adjusted
individual. Nor must we forget that large class of addicts who have
taken to drugs or drink in order to escape from physical pain. Aspirin,
let us remember, is a very recent invention. Until late in the Victorian
era, “poppy and mandragora,” along with henbane and ethyl alcohol,
were the only pain relievers available to civilized man. Toothache,
arthritis and neuralgia could, and frequently did, drive men and women
to become opium addicts.
“Toothache, arthritis and neuralgia could, and frequently did,
drive men and women to become opium addicts.”
De Quincey, for example, first resorted to opium in order to relieve
“excruciating rheumatic pains of the head.” He swallowed his poppy
and, an hour later, “What a resurrection from the lowest depths of the
inner spirit! What an apocalypse!” And it was not merely that he felt no
more pain. “This negative effect was swallowed up in the immensity of
those positive effects which had opened up before me, in the abyss of
divine enjoyment thus suddenly revealed…. Here was the secret of
happiness, about which the philosophers had disputed for so many ages,
at once discovered.”
“Resurrection, apocalypse, divine enjoyment, happiness….” De
Quincey’s words lead us to the very heart of our paradoxical mystery.
The problem of drug addiction and excessive drinking is not merely a
matter of chemistry and psychopathology, of relief from pain and
conformity with a bad society. It is also a problem in metaphysics—a
problem, one might almost say, in theology. In The Varieties of Religious
Experience, William James has touched on these metaphysical aspects of
addiction:
The sway of alcohol over mankind is unquestionably due to its
power to stimulate the mystical faculties in human nature,
usually crushed to earth by the cold facts and dry criticisms of
the sober hour. Sobriety diminishes, discriminates and says no.
Drunkenness expands, unites and says yes. It is in fact the great
exciter of the Yes function in man. It brings its votary from the
chill periphery of things into the radiant core. It makes him for
the moment one with truth. Not through mere perversity do men
run after it. To the poor and the unlettered it stands in the place

of symphony concerts and literature; and it is part of the deeper
mystery and tragedy of life that whiffs and gleams of something
that we immediately recognize as excellent should be vouchsafed
to so many of us only through the fleeting earlier phases of
what, in its totality, is so degrading a poison. The drunken
consciousness is one bit of the mystic consciousness, and our
total opinion of it must find its place in our opinion of that
larger whole.
William James was not the first to detect a likeness between
drunkenness and the mystical and pre-mystical states. On the day of
Pentecost there were people who explained the strange behavior of the
disciples by saying, “These men are full of new wine.”
Peter soon undeceived them: “These are not drunken, as ye suppose,
seeing it is but the third hour of the day. But this is that which was
spoken by the prophet Joel. And it shall come to pass in the last days,
saith God, I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh.”
And it is not only by “the dry critics of the sober hour” that the state
of God-intoxication has been likened to drunkenness. In their efforts to
express the inexpressible, the great mystics themselves have done the
same. Thus, St. Theresa of Avila tells us that she “regards the center of
our soul as a cellar, into which God admits us as and when it pleases
Him, so as to intoxicate us with the delicious wine of His grace.”
Every fully developed religion exists simultaneously on several
different levels. It exists as a set of abstract concepts about the world
and its governance. It exists as a set of rites and sacraments, as a
traditional method for manipulating the symbols, by means of which
beliefs about the cosmic order are expressed. It exists as the feelings of
love, fear and devotion evoked by this manipulation of symbols.
And finally it exists as a special kind of feeling or intuition—a sense
of the oneness of all things in their divine principle, a realization (to use
the language of Hindu theology) that “thou art That,” a mystical
experience of what seems self-evidently to be union with God.
The ordinary waking consciousness is a very useful and, on most
occasions, an indispensable state of mind; but it is by no means the only
form of consciousness, nor in all circumstances the best. Insofar as he
transcends his ordinary self and his ordinary mode of awareness, the
mystic is able to enlarge his vision, to look more deeply into the

unfathomable miracle of existence.
The mystical experience is doubly valuable; it is valuable because it
gives the experiencer a better understanding of himself and the world
and because it may help him to lead a less self-centered and more
creative life.
In hell, a great religious poet has written, the punishment of the lost
is to be “their sweating selves, but worse.” On earth we are not worse
than we are; we are merely our sweating selves, period.
Alas, that is quite bad enough. We love ourselves to the point of
idolatry; but we also intensely dislike ourselves—we find ourselves
unutterably boring. Correlated with this distaste for the idolatrously
worshiped self, there is in all of us a desire, sometimes latent,
sometimes conscious and passionately expressed, to escape from the
prison of our individuality, an urge to self-transcendence. It is to this
urge that we owe mystical theology, spiritual exercises and yoga—to
this, too, that we owe alcoholism and drug addiction.
Modern pharmacology has given us a host of new synthetics, but in
the field of the naturally occurring mind changers it has made no
radical discoveries. All the botanical sedatives, stimulants, vision
revealers, happiness promoters and cosmic-consciousness arousers were
found out thousands of years ago, before the dawn of history.
In many societies at many levels of civilization attempts have been
made to fuse drug intoxication with God intoxication. In ancient Greece,
for example, ethyl alcohol had its place in the established religion.
Dionysus, or Bacchus, as he was often called, was a true divinity. His
worshipers addressed him as Lusios, “Liberator,” or as Theoinos, “God-
wine.” The latter name telescopes fermented grape juice and the
supernatural into a single pentecostal experience. “Born a god,” writes
Euripides, “Bacchus is poured out as a libation to the gods, and through
him men receive good.” Unfortunately they also receive harm. The
blissful experience of self-transcendence which alcohol makes possible
has to be paid for, and the price is exorbitantly high.
Complete prohibition of all chemical mind changers can be decreed,
but cannot be enforced, and tends to create more evils than it cures.
Even more unsatisfactory has been the policy of complete toleration and
unrestricted availability. In England, during the first years of the
eighteenth century, cheap untaxed gin—“drunk for a penny, dead drunk
for two-pence”—threatened society with complete demoralization. A
century later, opium, in the form of laudanum, was reconciling the

victims of the Industrial Revolution to their lot—but at an appalling
cost in terms of addiction, illness and early death. Today most civilized
societies follow a course between the two extremes of total prohibition
and total toleration. Certain mind-changing drugs, such as alcohol, are
permitted and made available to the public on payment of a very high
tax, which tends to restrict their consumption. Other mind changers are
unobtainable except under doctors’ orders—or illegally from a dope
pusher. In this way the problem is kept within manageable bounds. It is
most certainly not solved. In their ceaseless search for self-
transcendence, millions of would-be mystics become addicts, commit
scores of thousands of crimes and are involved in hundreds of
thousands of avoidable accidents.
Do we have to go on in this dismal way indefinitely? Up until a few
years ago, the answer to such a question would have been a rueful “Yes,
we do.” Today, thanks to recent developments in biochemistry and
pharmacology, we are offered a workable alternative. We see that it
may soon be possible for us to do something better in the way of
chemical self-transcendence than what we have been doing so ineptly
for the last seventy or eighty centuries.
Is it possible for a powerful drug to be completely harmless?
Perhaps not. But the physiological cost can certainly be reduced to the
point where it becomes negligible. There are powerful mind changers
which do their work without damaging the taker’s psychophysical
organism and without inciting him to behave like a criminal or a
lunatic. Biochemistry and pharmacology are just getting into their
stride. Within a few years there will probably be dozens of powerful but
—physiologically and socially speaking—very inexpensive mind
changers on the market.
In view of what we already have in the way of powerful but nearly
harmless drugs; in view, above all, of what unquestionably we are very
soon going to have—we ought to start immediately to give some serious
thought to the problem of the new mind changers. How ought they to
be used? How can they be abused? Will human beings be better and
happier for their discovery? Or worse and more miserable?
The matter requires to be examined from many points of view. It is
simultaneously a question for biochemists and physicians, for
psychologists and social anthropologists, for legislators and law-
enforcement officers. And finally it is an ethical question and a religious
question. Sooner or later—and the sooner, the better—the various

specialists concerned will have to meet, discuss and then decide, in the
light of the best available evidence and the most imaginative kind of
foresight, what should be done. Meanwhile let us take a preliminary
look at this many-faceted problem.
Last year American physicians wrote 48,000,000 prescriptions for
tranquilizing drugs, many of which have been refilled, probably more
than once. The tranquilizers are the best known of the new, nearly
harmless mind changers. They can be used by most people, not indeed
with complete impunity, but at a reasonably low physiological cost.
Their enormous popularity bears witness to the fact that a great many
people dislike both their environment and “their sweating selves.”
Under tranquilizers the degree of their self-transcendence is not very
great; but it is enough to make all the difference, in many cases,
between misery and contentment.
In theory, tranquilizers should be given only to persons suffering
from rather severe forms of neurosis or psychosis. In practice,
unfortunately, many physicians have been carried away by the current
pharmacological fashion and are prescribing tranquilizers to all and
sundry. The history of medical fashions, it may be remarked, is at least
as grotesque as the history of fashions in women’s hats—at least as
grotesque and, since human lives are at stake, considerably more tragic.
In the present case, millions of patients who had no real need of the
tranquilizers have been given the pills by their doctors and have learned
to resort to them in every predicament, however triflingly
uncomfortable. This is very bad medicine and, from the pill taker’s
point of view, dubious morality and poor sense.
There are circumstances in which even the healthy are justified in
resorting to the chemical control of negative emotions. If you really
can’t keep your temper, let a tranquilizer keep it for you. But for
healthy people to resort to a chemical mind changer every time they
feel annoyed or anxious or tense is neither sensible nor right. Too much
tension and anxiety can reduce a man’s efficiency—but so can too little.
There are many occasions when it is entirely proper for us to feel
concerned, when an excess of placidity might reduce our chances of
dealing effectively with a ticklish situation. On these occasions, tension
mitigated and directed from within by the psychological methods of
self-control is preferable from every point of view to complacency
imposed from without by the methods of chemical control.
And now let us consider the case—not, alas, a hypothetical case—of
two societies competing with each other. In Society A, tranquilizers are

available by prescription and at a rather stiff price—which means, in
practice, that their use is confined to that rich and influential minority
which provides the society with its leadership. This minority of leading
citizens consumes several billions of the complacency-producing pills
every year. In Society B, on the other hand, the tranquilizers are not so
freely available, and the members of the influential minority do not
resort, on the slightest provocation, to the chemical control of what may
be necessary and productive tension. Which of these two competing
societies is likely to win the race? A society whose leaders make an
excessive use of soothing syrups is in danger of falling behind a society
whose leaders are not overtranquilized.
Now let us consider another kind of drug—still undiscovered, but
probably just around the corner—a drug capable of making people feel
happy in situations where they would normally feel miserable. Such a
drug would be a blessing, but a blessing fraught with grave political
dangers. By making harmless chemical euphoria freely available, a
dictator could reconcile an entire population to a state of affairs to
which self-respecting human beings ought not to be reconciled. Despots
have always found it necessary to supplement force by political or
religious propaganda. In this sense the pen is mightier than the sword.
But mightier than either the pen or the sword is the pill. In mental
hospitals it has been found that chemical restraint is far more effective
than strait jackets or psychiatry. The dictatorships of tomorrow will
deprive men of their freedom, but will give them in exchange a
happiness none the less real, as a subjective experience, for being
chemically induced. The pursuit of happiness is one of the traditional
rights of man; unfortunately, the achievement of happiness may turn
out to be incompatible with another of man’s rights—namely, liberty.
It is quite possible, however, that pharmacology will restore with
one hand what it takes away with the other. Chemically induced
euphoria could easily become a threat to individual liberty; but
chemically induced vigor and chemically heightened intelligence could
easily be liberty’s strongest bulwark. Most of us function at about 15 per
cent of capacity. How can we step up our lamentably low efficiency?
Two methods are available—the educational and the biochemical.
We can take adults and children as they are and give them a much
better training than we are giving them now. Or, by appropriate
biochemical methods, we can transform them into superior individuals.
If these superior individuals are given a superior education, the results
will be revolutionary. They will be startling even if we continue to

subject them to the rather poor educational methods at present in
vogue.
Will it in fact be possible to produce superior individuals by
biochemical means? The Russians certainly believe it. They are now
halfway through a Five Year Plan to produce “pharmacological
substances that normalize higher nervous activity and heighten human
capacity for work.” Precursors of these future mind improvers are
already being experimented with. It has been found, for example, that
when given in massive doses some of the vitamins—nicotinic acid and
ascorbic acid for example—sometimes produce a certain heightening of
psychic energy. A combination of two enzymes—ethylene disulphonate
and adenosine triphosphate, which, when injected together, improve
carbohydrate metabolism in nervous tissue—may also turn out to be
effective.
Meanwhile good results are being claimed for various new synthetic,
nearly harmless stimulants. There is iproniazid, which, according to
some authorities, “appears to increase the total amount of psychic
energy.” Unfortunately, iproniazid in large doses has side effects which
in some cases may be extremely serious! Another psychic energizer is an
amino alcohol which is thought to increase the body’s production of
acetylcholine, a substance of prime importance in the functioning of the
nervous system. In view of what has already been achieved, it seems
quite possible that, within a few years, we may be able to lift ourselves
up by our own biochemical bootstraps.
In the meantime let us all fervently wish the Russians every success
in their current pharmacological venture. The discovery of a drug
capable of increasing the average individual’s psychic energy, and its
wide distribution throughout the U.S.S.R., would probably mean the
end of Russia’s present form of government. Generalized intelligence
and mental alertness are the most powerful enemies of dictatorship and
at the same time the basic conditions of effective democracy. Even in
the democratic West we could do with a bit of psychic energizing.
Between them, education and pharmacology may do something to offset
the effects of that deterioration of our biological material to which
geneticists have frequently called attention.
From these political and ethical considerations let us now pass to
the strictly religious problems that will be posed by some of the new
mind changers. We can foresee the nature of these future problems by
studying the effects of a natural mind changer, which has been used for
centuries past in religious worship; I refer to the peyote cactus of

Northern Mexico and the Southwestern United States. Peyote contains
mescaline—which can now be produced synthetically—and mescaline,
in William James’ phrase, “stimulates the mystical faculties in human
nature” far more powerfully and in a far more enlightening way than
alcohol and, what is more, it does so at a physiological and social cost
that is negligibly low. Peyote produces self-transcendence in two ways
—it introduces the taker into the Other World of visionary experience,
and it gives him a sense of solidarity with his fellow worshipers, with
human beings at large and with the divine nature of things.
The effects of peyote can be duplicated by synthetic mescaline and
by LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide), a derivative of ergot. Effective in
incredibly small doses, LSD is now being used experimentally by
psychotherapists in Europe, in South America, in Canada and the United
States. It lowers the barrier between conscious and subconscious and
permits the patient to look more deeply and understandingly into the
recesses of his own mind. The deepening of self-knowledge takes place
against a background of visionary and even mystical experience.
When administered in the right kind of psychological environment,
these chemical mind changers make possible a genuine religious
experience. Thus a person who takes LSD or mescaline may suddenly
understand—not only intellectually but organically, experientially—the
meaning of such tremendous religious affirmations as “God is love,” or
“Though He slay me, yet will I trust in Him.”
It goes without saying that this kind of temporary self-transcendence
is no guarantee of permanent enlightenment or a lasting improvement
of conduct. It is a “gratuitous grace,” which is neither necessary nor
sufficient for salvation, but which if properly used, can be enormously
helpful to those who have received it. And this is true of all such
experiences, whether occurring spontaneously, or as the result of
swallowing the right kind of chemical mind changer, or after
undertaking a course of “spiritual exercises” or bodily mortification.
Those who are offended by the idea that the swallowing of a pill
may contribute to a genuinely religious experience should remember
that all the standard mortifications—fasting, voluntary sleeplessness and
self-torture—inflicted upon themselves by the ascetics of every religion
for the purpose of acquiring merit, are also, like the mind-changing
drugs, powerful devices for altering the chemistry of the body in
general and the nervous system in particular. Or consider the
procedures generally known as spiritual exercises. The breathing
techniques taught by the yogi of India result in prolonged suspensions

of respiration. These in turn result in an increased concentration of
carbon dioxide in the blood; and the psychological consequence of this
is a change in the quality of consciousness. Again, meditations involving
long, intense concentration upon a single idea or image may also result
—for neurological reasons which I do not profess to understand—in a
slowing down of respiration and even in prolonged suspensions of
breathing.
Many ascetics and mystics have practiced their chemistry-changing
mortifications and spiritual exercises while living, for longer or shorter
periods, as hermits. Now, the life of a hermit, such as Saint Anthony, is
a life in which there are very few external stimuli. But as Hebb, John
Lilly and other experimental psychologists have recently shown in the
laboratory, a person in a limited environment, which provides very few
external stimuli, soon undergoes a change in the quality of his
consciousness and may transcend his normal self to the point of hearing
voices or seeing visions, often extremely unpleasant, like so many of
Saint Anthony’s visions, but sometimes beatific.
That men and women can, by physical and chemical means,
transcend themselves in a genuinely spiritual way is something which,
to the squeamish idealist, seems rather shocking. But, after all, the drug
or the physical exercise is not the cause of the spiritual experience; it is
only its occasion.
Writing of William James’ experiments with nitrous oxide, Bergson
has summed up the whole matter in a few lucid sentences. “The psychic
disposition was there, potentially, only waiting a signal to express itself
in action. It might have been evoked spiritually by an effort made on its
own spiritual level. But it could just as well be brought about
materially, by an inhibition of what inhibited it, by the removing of an
obstacle; and this effect was the wholly negative one produced by the
drug.” Where, for any reason, physical or moral, the psychological
dispositions are unsatisfactory, the removal of obstacles by a drug or by
ascetic practices will result in a negative rather than a positive spiritual
experience. Such an infernal experience is extremely distressing, but
may also be extremely salutary. There are plenty of people to whom a
few hours in hell—the hell that they themselves have done so much to
create—could do a world of good.
Physiologically costless, or nearly costless, stimulators of the
mystical faculties are now making their appearance, and many kinds of
them will soon be on the market. We can be quite sure that, as and
when they become available, they will be extensively used. The urge to

self-transcendence is so strong and so general that it cannot be
otherwise. In the past, very few people have had spontaneous
experiences of a pre-mystical or fully mystical nature; still fewer have
been willing to undergo the psychophysical disciplines which prepare
an insulated individual for this kind of self-transcendence. The powerful
but nearly costless mind changers of the future will change all this
completely. Instead of being rare, pre-mystical and mystical experiences
will become common. What was once the spiritual privilege of the few
will be made available to the many. For the ministers of the world’s
organized religions, this will raise a number of unprecedented
problems. For most people, religion has always been a matter of
traditional symbols and of their own emotional, intellectual and ethical
response to those symbols. To men and women who have had direct
experience of self-transcendence into the mind’s Other World of vision
and union with the nature of things, a religion of mere symbols is not
likely to be very satisfying. The perusal of a page from even the most
beautifully written cookbook is no substitute for the eating of dinner.
We are exhorted to “taste and see that the Lord is good.”
In one way or another, the world’s ecclesiastical authorities will
have to come to terms with the new mind changers. They may come to
terms with them negatively, by refusing to have anything to do with
them. In that case, a psychological phenomenon, potentially of great
spiritual value, will manifest itself outside the pale of organized
religion. On the other hand, they may choose to come to terms with the
mind changers in some positive way—exactly how, I am not prepared to
guess.
My own belief is that, though they may start by being something of
an embarrassment, these new mind changers will tend in the long run
to deepen the spiritual life of the communities in which they are
available. That famous “revival of religion,” about which so many
people have been talking for so long, will not come about as the result
of evangelistic mass meetings or the television appearances of
photogenic clergymen. It will come about as the result of biochemical
discoveries that will make it possible for large numbers of men and
women to achieve a radical self-transcendence and a deeper
understanding of the nature of things. And this revival of religion will
be at the same time a revolution. From being an activity mainly
concerned with symbols, religion will be transformed into an activity
concerned mainly with experience and intuition—an everyday
mysticism underlying and giving significance to everyday rationality,

everyday tasks and duties, everyday human relationships.
Selected from Collected Essays by Aldous Huxley, Harper & Brothers,
1958.

Read on
The Complete Aldous Huxley Bibliography
Dates are the year of first publication.
The Burning Wheel
1916
Jonah
1917
The Defeat of Youth and Other Poems
1918
Leda
1920
Limbo: Notes and Essays
1920
Crome Yellow
1921
Mortal Coils: Five Stories
1922
On the Margin
1923
Antic Hay
1923
Little Mexican
1924
Those Barren Leaves
1925
Along the Road: Notes and Essays
1925
Two or Three Graces: Four Stories
1926
Jesting Pilate: An Intellectual Holiday (The Diary of a Journey)
1926
Essays New and Old (U.S. title: Essays Old and New)
1926
Proper Studies
1927
Point Counter Point
1928
Do What You Will: Essays
1929
Brief Candles
1930
Vulgarity in Literature and Other Essays: Digressions from a Theme
1930
The World of Light
1931
The Cicadas and Other Poems
1931

Music at Night and Other Essays
1931
Brave New World
1932
Texts and Pretexts: An Anthology of Commentaries
1932
Beyond the Mexique Bay
1934
Eyeless in Gaza
1936
The Olive Tree and Other Essays
1936
What Are You Going to Do About It?: The Case for Constructive
Peace
1936
Ends and Means: An Enquiry into the Nature of Ideals and into the
Methods Employed for Their Realization
1937
After Many a Summer Dies the Swan
1939
Gray Eminence: A Study in Religion and Politics
1941
The Art of Seeing
1942
Time Must Have a Stop
1944
The Perennial Philosophy
1946
Science, Liberty and Peace
1946
Ape and Essence
1948
The Gioconda Smile
1948
Themes and Variations
1950
The Devils of Loudun
1952
The Doors of Perception
1954
The Genius and the Goddess
1955
Heaven and Hell
1956
Adonis and the Alphabet and Other Essays (U.S. title: Tomorrow
and Tomorrow and Tomorrow)
1956
Brave New World Revisited
1958
Island
1962
Literature and Science
1963

Have You Read?
More by Aldous Huxley
THE DEVILS OF LOUDUN
First published in 1952, The Devils of Loudun is Aldous Huxley’s thrilling
account of one of history’s most sensational cases of mass demonic
possession. The year 1643: When an entire convent is apparently
possessed by the devil, a charismatic priest is accused of being in league
with Satan and seducing the nuns—both spiritually and sexually. After a
celebrated trial, the priest, Urban Grandier, was burnt at the stake for
witchcraft. Here is the gripping true history of Grandier and the nuns of
Loudun, as told by one of the master storytellers of the twentieth
century.

“Huxley’s masterpiece and perhaps the most enjoyable book about
spirituality ever written. In telling the grotesque, bawdy and true story
of a seventeenth-century convent of cloistered French nuns who
contrived to have a priest they never met burned alive as a warlock…
Huxley painlessly conveys a wealth of information about mysticism and
the unconscious.”
—Washington Post Book World

THE PERENNIAL PHILOSOPHY
An astonishing collection of writings drawn from the world’s great
religions, edited and commented upon by Huxley with characteristic
insight, wit, and passion.
“It is the masterpiece of all anthologies. As Mr. Huxley has proved
before, he can find and frame rare beauty in literature, and here, long
before Freud, writers are quoted who combine beauty with proud
psychology.”
—New York Times
BRAVE NEW WORLD

The astonishing novel Brave New World, originally published in 1932,
presents Aldous Huxley’s vision of the future—of a world utterly
transformed. Through the most efficient scientific and psychological
engineering, people are genetically designed to be passive and therefore
consistently useful to the ruling class. This powerful work of speculative
fiction sheds a blazing critical light on the present and is considered to
be Aldous Huxley’s most enduring masterpiece.
“Mr. Huxley is eloquent in his declaration of an artist’s faith in man,
and it is his eloquence, bitter in attack, noble in defense, that, when one
has closed the book, one remembers.”
—Saturday Review of Literature
“Huxley never went out of style. Something about his work seem[s] to
tug at our consciousness…. There is no escape from anxiety and
struggle, and Huxley assists us in attaining this valuable glimpse of the
obvious, precisely because it was a conclusion that was in many ways
unwelcome to him.”
—Christopher Hitchens

BRAVE NEW WORLD REVISITED
When the novel Brave New World first appeared in 1932, its shocking
analysis of a scientific dictatorship seemed a projection into the remote
future. Here, in one of the most important and fascinating books of his
career, Aldous Huxley uses his tremendous knowledge of human
relations to compare the modern-day world with his prophetic fantasy.
He scrutinizes threats to humanity, such as overpopulation, propaganda,
and chemical persuasion, and explains why we have found it virtually
impossible to avoid them. Brave New World Revisited is a trenchant plea
that humankind should educate itself for freedom before it is too late.
“It is a frightening experience…to discover how much of his satirical
prediction of a distant future became reality in so short a time.”
—New York Times Book Review
THE GENIUS AND THE GODDESS

Talking with a friend on Christmas Eve while a small grandson sleeps
upstairs, John Rivers is moved to set the record straight about his
mentor—the legendary scientific genius in whose home, thirty years
before, ecstasy and torment had laid hold of Rivers, shocking him out of
“half-baked imbecility into something more nearly resembling the
human form.” Fatefully, Rivers had an affair with the famous man’s
young wife, bringing the couple to ruin. Now back in print, The Genius
and the Goddess is Aldous Huxley’s lost novella of the conflict between
reason and passion.
“A genius…. A writer who spent his life decrying the onward march of
the Machine.”
—The New Yorker
EYELESS IN GAZA

First published in 1936, Eyeless in Gaza is Aldous Huxley’s loosely
autobiographical novel of one man’s search for an alternative to the
moral disillusionment of the modern world. Anthony Beavis, a cynical
libertine Oxford graduate, comes of age in the vacuum left by World
War I. His life, loves, and foreign adventures leave him unfulfilled, until
a friend inspires Anthony to become a revolutionary in Mexico.
Shattered by the experience, Anthony forges a radical new spiritual
understanding. Eyeless in Gaza remains one of the finest modern novels,
a testament to Huxley’s powers as an artist and thinker.
“An important book…. Without parallel in our contemporary
literature.”
—New York Times Book Review
ISLAND

In this, his last novel, Huxley transports us to a Pacific island where, for
a hundred and twenty years, an ideal society has flourished. On the
island of Pala—as in the Brave New World—science has helped to
advance the founder’s plans. But this time those plans have the goal of
freeing each person, not enslaving him. Inevitably this island of bliss
attracts the envy and enmity of the surrounding world—not least
because of its vast oil reserves. A conspiracy is underway to take over
Pala, and events begin to move when an agent of the conspirators, a
newspaperman named Faranby, is shipwrecked on the island.
“Island is a welcome and in many ways unique addition to the select
company of books—from Plato to now—that have presented, in
imaginary terms, a coherent view of what society is not but might be.”
—New York Times Book Review
Don’t miss the next book by your favorite author. Sign up now
for AuthorTracker by visiting www.AuthorTracker.com.

BOOKS BY ALDOUS HUXLEY
Novels
The Genius and the Goddess
Ape and Essence
Time Must Have a Stop
After Many a Summer Dies the Swan
Eyeless in Gaza
Point Counter Point
Those Barren Leaves
Antic Hay
Crome Yellow
Brave New World
Island
Essays and Belles Lettres
Brave New World Revisited
Tomorrow and Tomorrow and Tomorrow
Heaven and Hell
The Doors of Perception
The Devils of Loudun
Themes and Variations
Ends and Means
Texts and Pretexts
The Olive Tree
Music at Night
Vulgarity in Literature
Do What You Will
Proper Studies
Jesting Pilate
Along the Road
On the Margin
Essays New and Old
The Art of Seeing
The Perennial Philosophy
Science, Liberty and Peace

Short Stories
Collected Short Stories
Brief Candles
Two or Three Graces
Limbo
Little Mexican
Mortal Coils
Biography
Grey Eminence
Poetry
The Cicadas
Leda
Travel
Beyond the Mexique Bay
Drama
Mortal Coils—A Play
The World of Light
The Discovery, Adapted from Francis Sheridan
Selected Works
Rotunda
The World of Aldous Huxley

Credits
Cover design by Milan Bozic

Copyright
P.S.™ is a trademark of HarperCollins Publishers.
THE DOORS OF PERCEPTION AND HEAVEN AND HELL. Copyright © 1954,
1955, 1956 by Aldous Huxley. All rights reserved under International
and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required
fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, non-transferable right to
access and read the text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text
may be reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded, decompiled, reverse
engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and
retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or
mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the express
written permission of HarperCollins e-books.
Adobe Digital Edition August 2009 ISBN 978-0-06-189282-0
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

About the Publisher
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321)
Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au
Canada
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900
Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca
New Zealand
HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited
P.O. Box 1
Auckland, New Zealand
http://www.harpercollins.co.nz
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
77-85 Fulham Palace Road
London, W6 8JB, UK
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.uk
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
10 East 53rd Street
New York, NY 10022
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com

* See the following papers: “Schizophrenia. A New Approach.” By Humphry Osmond and John
Smythies. Journal of Mental Science. Vol. XCVIII. April, 1952.
“On Being Mad.” By Humphry Osmond. Saskatchewan Psychiatric Services Journal. Vol. I. No. 2.
September, 1952.
“The Mescalin Phenomena.” By John Smythies. The British Journal of the Philosophy of Science. Vol.
III. February, 1953.
“Schizophrenia: A New Approach.” By Abram Hoffer, Humphry Osmond and John Smythies. Journal
of Mental Science. Vol. C. No. 418. January, 1954.
Numerous other papers on the biochemistry, pharmacology, psychology and neurophysiology of
schizophrenia and the mescalin phenomena are in preparation.

* In his monograph, Menomini Peyotism, published (December, 1952) in the Transactions of the
American Philosophical Society, Professor J. S. Slotkin has written that “the habitual use of Peyote does
not seem to produce any increased tolerance or dependence. I know many people who have been
Peyotists for forty to fifty years. The amount of Peyote they use depends upon the solemnity of the
occasion; in general they do not take any more Peyote now than they did years ago. Also, there is
sometimes an interval of a month or more between rites, and they go without Peyote during this period
without feeling any craving for it. Personally, even after a series of rites occurring on four successive
weekends, I neither increased the amount of Peyote consumed nor felt any continued need for it.” It is
evidently with good reason that “Peyote has never been legally declared a narcotic, or its use prohibited
by the federal government.” However, “during the long history of Indian-white contact, white officials
have usually tried to suppress the use of Peyote, because it has been conceived to violate their own
mores. But these attempts have always failed.” In a footnote Dr. Slotkin adds that “it is amazing to hear
the fantastic stories about the effects of Peyote and the nature of the ritual, which are told by the white
and Catholic Indian officials in the Menomini Reservation. None of them have had the slightest first-
hand experience with the plant or with the religion, yet some fancy themselves to be authorities and
write official reports on the subject.”

* See Appendix I, page 143.

* See Appendix II, page 149.

* See Appendix III, page 157.

* See Appendix IV, page 173.

* A. K. Coomaraswamy, The Transformation of Nature in Art, p. 40.

* See Appendix V, page 176.

* Journal d’une Schizophrène, by M. A. Sechehaye. Paris. 1950.

** See Appendix VI, page 180.

* See Appendix VII, page 182.

* See Appendix VIII, page 184.

* See The Biology of Human Starvation by A. Keys (University of Minnesota Press, 1950); also the
recent (1955) reports of the work on the role of vitamin deficiencies in mental disease, carried out by Dr.
George Watson and his associates in Southern California.
