International Library of Psychology 
Philosophy and Scientific Method 
T ractatus Logico-Philosophicus 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

International Library of Psychology 
Philosophy and Scientific Method 
GENERAL EDITOR • C. K. OGDEN, M.A. (Magdalene College, Cambridge) 
PHII.OSOPHICAL STUDIES • • • by G. E. MOORE 
TRACTATUS LoGico-PHILOSOPHicus by L. WITTGENSTEIN 
PSYCHOLOGICAL TYPES* by c. G. JUNO 
SCIENTIFIC THOUGHT* • • • • • by c. D. BROAD 
THE MEANING OP MEANING • • • • by C. K. OGDEN and I. A. RICHARDS 
THE PRACTICE AND THEORY OP INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY by ALFRED ADLER 
SPECULATIONS (Preface by Jacob Epstein) by T. E. HULME 
THE PHILOSOPHY OP 'As IP' by H. VAIHINGER 
PSYCHE • • • • by E. ROHDE 
THE GROWTH OP THE MIND* by K. KOPPKA 
THE MENTALITY OP APES • • • by w. KOHLER 
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF A MUSICAL PRODIGY • by G. REVESZ 
PRINCIPLES OF LITERARY CRITICISM* • • • by I. A. RICHARDS 
THE METAPHYSICAL FOUNDATIONS OP MODERN SCIENCE by E. A. BURTT 
THOUGHT AND THE BRAIN* • • by H. P1ERON 
PROBLEMS OP PERSONALITY in honour ef MORTON PRINCE 
COLOUR BLINDNESS • • by M. COLLINS 
THE HISTORY OP MATERIALISM by F. A. LANGE 
PERSONALITY* • • • by R. G. GORDON 
EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY* • • • • by CHARLES Fox 
THE LANGUAGE AND THOUGHT OP THE CHILD* • by J. PIAGET 
SEX AND REPRESSION IN SAVAGE SOCIETY* by B. MALINOWSKI 
RELIGIOUS CONVERSION • • by s. DE SANCTIS 
THE SOCIAL INSECTS • by ,v. MORTON WHEELER 
THEORETICAL BIOLOGY by J. VON UEXKULL 
Poss1BILITY* by ScoTT BucHANAN 
THE SYMBOLIC PROCESS by J. F. MARKEY 
PoLITICAL PLURALISM • by KuNG-CHUAN Hs1Ao 
INTEGRATIVE PSYCHOLOGY* by w. M. MARSTON 
PLATO'S THEORY OP ETHICS* • • • • by R. c. LODGE 
HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION TO MODERN PSYCHOLOGY • !;y G. l\,fuRPHY 
B10LOGICAL PRINCIPLES by J. H. WooDGER 
THE TRAUMA OP BIRTH • • • • by OTTO RANK 
FouNDATIONS OP GEOMETRY AND INDUCTION • by JEAN N1coD 
THE LAWS OP FEELlNG • • • by F. PAULHAN 
THE MENTAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE CHILD by K. BUHLER 
EIDETIC IMAGERY • • • by E. R. JAENSCH 
THE FOUNDATIONS OP MATHEMATICS by F. P. RAMSEY 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE UNCONSCIOUS • • by E. VON HARTMANN 
OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF GREEK PHILOSOPHY. by E. ZELLER 
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF CHILDREN'S DRAWINGS • by HELGA ENG 
INVENTION AND THE UNCONSCIOUS by J. M. MONTMASSON 
THE THEORY OF LEGISLATION by JEREMY BENTHAM 
THE SOCIAL LIFE OF MONKEYS • • • • by s. ZUCKERMAN 
THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE SEXUAL IMPULSES by R. E. MONEY KYRLE 
CONSTITUTION TYPES IN DELINQUENCY by w. A. WILLEMSE 
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ANIMALS • • by F. ALVERDES 
BENTHAM's THEOR.Y OF F1c110Ns* • by C. K. OGDEN 
THE NATURE OF LEARNING • • • by G. HUMPHREY 
THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE COMMUNITY. by WEN KWEI LIAO 
THE NATURE OF MATHEMATICS • • by MAX BLACK 
INFANT SPEECH • • by M. M. LEWIS 
IDEOLOGY AND UTOPIA • • • • by K. MANNHEIM 
AN EXAMINATION OF LoGICAL Posn1v1sM by J. WEINBERG 
THE LOGICAL SYNTAX OF LANGUAGE • by R. CARNAP 
PLATO'S COSMOLOGY* • by F. M. CORNFORD 
CHARLES PE1RcE's EMPIRICISM* by J. BucHLER 
THE LIMITS OF SCIENCE • by L. CHWISTEK 
THE CONDITIONS OP KNOWING • • • • • • by A. SINCLAIR 
BERTRAND RUSSELL'S CONSTRUCTION OF THE EXTERNAL WORLD • by c. A. FRITZ 
TREATISE ON INDUCTION AND PROBABILITY by G. H. VON WRIGHT 
WHAT IS VALUE by E. w. HALL 
PLATO'S PHAEDO by R. s. BLUCK 
* Asterisks denote that other books by the same author are included in this series. 
A complete list will be found at the end of the volume. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

Tractatus 
Logico-Philosophicus 
By 
LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN 
With an Introduction by 
BERTRAND RUSSELL, F.R.S. 
LONDON 
ROUTLEDGE & KEGAN PAUL LTD 
BROADWAY HOUSE: 68-74 CARTER LANE, E.C.4 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

First published in this Series 1922 
Second impression (with a few corrections) 1933 
Third impression 1947 
Fourth impression 1949 
Fifth impression 1951 
Sixth impression (with an Index) 1955 
Seventh impression 1958 
Eighth impression 1960 
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY 
LUND HUMPHRIES 
LONDON • BRADFORD 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

NOTE 
In renderlng Mr Wittgenstein's Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus 
available for Enxlish readers, the somewhat unusual course has been 
adopted of printing the original side by side with the translation. 
Such a method of presentation seemed desirable both on account of the 
obvious difficulties raised by the vocabulary and in vie:11 of the 
peculiar literary character of the whole. As a result, a ce, lain 
latitude has been possible t"n passages to which objection migltt 
otherwise be taken as over-literal. 
The proofs of the translat£on and the version of the original 
which appeared in the final number of Ostwald's Annalen der 
. N aturphilosophie ( 1921) have been very carefully revised by 
the author himself; and the Editor fu,ther desires to express his 
indebtedness to llf r F. P. Ramse)', of Trinity College, Cambridge, 
for assistance both with the translation and in the preparation of 
the book for the press. 
C. K. O. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INTRODUCTION 
Bv BERTRAND RUSSELL 
MR WITTGENSTEIN'S Tractatus Logico-Phz1osopki'cus, whether 
or not it prove to give the ultimate truth on the matters 
with which it deals, certainly deserves, by its breadth and 
scope and profundity, to be considered an important event 
in the philosophical world. Starting from the principles 
of Symbolism and the relations which are necessary 
between words and things in any language, it applies 
the result of this inquiry to various departments of tradi­
tional philosophy, showing in each case how traditional 
philosophy and traditional solutions arise out of ignorance 
of the principles of Symbolism and out of misuse of 
language. 
The logical structure of propositions and the nature 
of logical inference are first dealt with. Thence we pass 
successively to Theory of Knowledge, Principles of Physics, 
Ethics, and finally the Mystical (das Mystische). 
In order to understand Mr Wittgenstein's book, it is 
necessary to realize what is the problem with which he is 
concerned. In the part of his theory which deals with 
Symbolism he is concerned with the conditions which 
would have to be fulfilled by a logically perfect language. 
There are various problems as regards language/First, 
there is the problem what actually occurs in our minds 
when we use language with the intention of meaning 
something by it ; this problem belongs to psychology. 
Secondly, there is the problem as to what is the relation 
subsisting between thoughts, words, or sentences, and that 
which they refer to or mean ; this problem belongs to 
epistemology. Thirdly, there is the problem of using 
sentences so as to convey truth rather than falsehood; 
7 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INTRODUCTION 
this belongs to the special sciences dealing with the 
subject-matter of the sentences in question. Fourthly, 
there is the question : what relation must one fact (such 
as a sentence) have to another in order to be capable 
of being a sym bot for that other? This last is a logical 
question, and is the one with which Mr Wittgenstein is 
concerned.~ He is concerned with the conditions for accurate · 
Symbolisn{,, i.e. for Symbolism in which a sentence 
"means" something quite definite. In practice, language 
is always more or less vague, so that what we assert is 
never quite precise. Thus, logic has two problems to deal 
with in regard to Symbolism: ( 1) the conditions for sense 
rather than nonsense in combinations of symbols; (2) the 
conditions for uniqueness of meaning or reference in 
symbols or combinations of symbols. A logically perfect 
language has rules of syntax which prevent nonsense, and 
has single symbols which always have a definite and 
unique meaning. Mr Wittgenstein is concerned with the 
conditions for a logically perfect language-not that any 
language is logically perfect, or that we believe ourselves 
capable, here and now, of constructing a logically perfect 
language, but that the whole function of language is to 
have meaning, and it only fulfils this function in propor­
tion as it approaches to the ideal language which we 
postulate. 
The essential business of language is to assert or 
deny facts. Given the syntax of a language, the meaning 
of a sentence is determinate as soon as the meaning of 
the component words is known. In order that a certain 
sentence should assert a certain fact there must, however 
the language may be constructed, be something in common 
between the structure of the sentence and the structure of 
the fact. This is perhaps the most fundamental thesis 
of Mr Wittgenstein's theory. That which has to be in 
common between the sentence and the fact cannot, so 
he contends, be itself in turn said in language. It can, 
in his phraseology, only be shown, not said, for whatever 
we may say will still need to have the same structure. 
8 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INTRODUCTION 
The first requisite of an ideal language would be that 
there should be one name for every simple, and never the 
same name for two different simples. A name is a simple 
symbol in the sense that it has no parts which are them­
selves symbols. In a logically perfect language nothing 
that is not simple will have a simple symbol. The symbol 
for the whole will be a "complex," containing the symbols 
for the parts. In speaking of a "complex" we are, as 
will appear later, sinning against the rules of philosophical 
grammar, but this is unavoidable at the outset. " Most 
propositions and questions that have been written about 
philosophical matters are not false but senseless. We 
cannot, therefore, answer questions of this kind at all, 
but only state their senselessness. Most questions and 
propositions of the philosopher result from the fact that 
we do not understand the logic of our language. They 
are of the same kind as the question whether the Good is 
more or less identical than the Beautiful " (4.003). What 
is complex in the world is a fact. Facts which are not 
compounded of other facts are what Mr Wittgenstein calls 
Sachverhalte, whereas a fact which may consist of two 
or more facts is called a Tatsache: thus, for example, 
"Socrates is wise " is a Sachverhalt, as well as a Tatsache, 
whereas '' Socrates is wise and Plato is his pupil" is a 
Tatsaclu but not a Sachverhalt. 
He compares linguistic expression to projection in 
geometry. A geometrical figure may be projected in 
many ways: each of these ways corresponds.to a different 
language, but the projective properties of the original 
figure remain unchanged whichever of these ways may 
be adopted. These projective properties correspond to 
that which in his theory the proposition and the fact 
must have in common, if the proposition is to assert the 
fact. 
In certain elementary ways this is, of course, obvious. 
It is impossible, for example, to make a statement about 
two men (assuming for the moment that the men may 
be treated as simples), without employing two names, and 
9 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INTRODUCTION 
if you are going to assert a relation between ihe two men 
it will be necessary that the sentence in which you make 
the assertion shall establish a relation between the two 
names. If we say " Plato loves Socrates," the word 
'' loves" which occurs between the word '' Plato" and the 
word ''Socrates" establishes a certain relation between 
these two words, and it is owing to this fact that our 
sentence is able to assert a relation between the person's 
name by the words "Plato" and "Socrates." "\Ve must 
not say, the complex sign 'a Rb' says 'a stands in a 
certain relation R to b'; but we must say, that 'a' 
stands in a certain relation to 'b' says that a R b" 
(3. 1432). 
Mr Wittgenstein begins his theory of Symbolism with 
the statement (2. 1): "We make to ourselves pictures of 
facts." A picture, he says, is a model of the reality, and 
to the objects in the reality correspond the elements of 
the picture: the picture itself is a fact. The fact that 
things have a certain relation to each other is represented 
by the fact that in the picture its elements have a certain 
relation to one another. '' In the picture and the pictured 
there must be something identical in order that the one 
can be a picture of the other at all. What the picture 
must have in common with reality in order to be able 
to represent it after its manner-rightly or falsely-is its 
form of representation" (2. 161, 2. 17). 
We speak of a logical picture of a reality when we 
wish to imply only so much resemblance as is essential to 
its being a picture in any sense, that is to say, when we 
wish to imply no more than identity of logical form. 
The logical picture of a fact, he says, is a Gtdanke. A 
picture can correspond or not correspond with the fact and 
be accordingly true or false, but in both cases it shares the 
logical form with the fact. The sense in which he speaks of 
pictures is illustrated by his statement: "The gramophone 
record, the musical thought, the score, the waves of sound, 
all stand to one another in that pictorial internal relation 
which holds between language and the world. To all of 
10 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INTRODUCTION 
them the logical structure is common. {Like the two 
youths, their two horses and their lilies in the story. 
They are all in a certain sense one)" (4.014). The 
possibility of a proposition representing a fact rests upon 
the fact that in it objects are represented by signs. The 
so-called logical "constants" are not represented by signs, 
but are themselves present in the proposition as in the 
fact. The proposition and the fact must exhibit the same 
logical " manifold," and this cannot be itself represented 
since it has to be in common between the fact and 
the picture. Mr Wittgenstein maintains that everything 
properly philosophical belongs to what can only be shown, 
to what is in common between a fact and its logical 
picture. It results from this view that nothing correct can 
be said in philosophy. Every philosophical proposition 
is bad grammar, and the best that we can hope to achieve 
by philosophical discussion is to lead people to see that 
philosophical discussion is a mistake. '' Philosophy is 
not one of the natural sciences. (The word ' philosophy' 
must mean something which stands above or below, but 
not beside the natural sciences.) The object of philosophy 
is the logical clarification of thoughts. Philosophy is not 
a theory but an activity. A philosophical work consists 
essentially of elucidations. The result of philosophy is 
not a number of 'philosophical propositions,' but to 
make propositions clear. Philosophy should make clear 
and delimit sharply the thoughts which otherwise are, 
as it were, opaque and blurred" (4. I 11 and 4. 112). In 
accordance with this principle the things that have to b·e 
said in leading the reader to understand Mr Wittgenstein's 
theory are all of them things which that theory itself 
condemns as meaningless. With this proviso we will 
endeavour to convey the picture of the world which 
seems to underlie his system. 
The world consists of facts : facts cannot strictly 
speaking be defined, but we can explain what we mean 
by saying that facts are what make propositions true, or 
false. Facts may contain parts which are facts or may 
II 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INTRODUCTION 
contain no such parts; for example: "Socrates was a wise 
Athenian," consists of the two facts, '' Socrates was wise," 
and "Socrates was an Athenian.,, A fact which has no 
parts that are facts is called by Mr Wittgenstein a Sachver­
halt. This is the same thing that he calls an atomic fact. 
An atomic fact, although it contains no parts that are 
facts, nevertheless does contain parts. If we may regard 
"Socrates is wise" as an atomic fact we perceive that it 
contains the constituents "Socrates" and " wise." If an 
atomic fact is analysed as fully as possibly (theoretical, 
not practical possibility is meant) the constituents finally 
reached may be called "simples" or ''objects." It is not 
contended by Wittgenstein that we can actually isolate 
the simple or have empirical knowledge of it. It is a 
logical necessity demanded by theory, like an electron. 
His ground for maintaining that there must be simples 
is that every complex presupposes a fact. It is not 
necessarily assumed that the complexity of facts is finite ; 
even if every fact consisted of an infinite number of atomic 
facts and if every atomic fact consisted of an infinite 
number of objects there would still be objects and atomic 
facts (4. 22 I I). The assertion that there is a certain 
complex reduces to the assertion that its constituents 
are related in a certain way, which is the assertion of 
a fact: thus if we give a name to the complex the name 
only has meaning in virtue of the truth of a certain 
proposition, namely the proposition asserting the related­
ness of the constituents of the complex. Thus the naming 
of complexes presupposes propositions, while propositions 
presupposes the naming of simples. In this way the 
naming of simples is shown to be what is logically first 
in logic. 
The world is fully described if all atomic facts are 
known, together with the fact that these are all of them. 
The world is not described by merely naming all the 
objects in it; it is necessary also to know the atomic facts 
of which these objects are constituents. Given this total 
of atomic facts, every true proposition, however complex, 
12 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INTRODUGTION 
can theoretically be inferred. A proposition (true or 
false) asserting an atomic fact is called an atomic proposi­
tion. All atomic propositions are logically independent 
of each other. No atomic proposition implies any other 
or is inconsistent with any other. Thus the whole business 
of logical inference is concerned with propositions which 
are not atomic. Such propositions may be called 
molecular. 
Wittgenstein's theory of molecular propositions turns 
upon his theory of the construction of truth-functions. 
A truth-function of a proposition p is a proposition 
containing p and such that its truth or falsehood depends 
only upon the truth or falsehood of p, and similarly a 
truth-function of several propositions p, q, r . . . is one 
containing p, q, r . . . and such that its truth or false­
hood depends only upon the truth or falsehood of 
p, q, r . . . It might seem at first sight as though there 
were other functions of propositions besides truth-functions ; 
such, for example, would be '' A believes p," for in general 
A will believe some true propositions and some false 
ones : unless he is an exceptionally gifted individual, we 
cannot infer that p is true from the fact that he believes 
it or that p is false from the fact that he does not believe 
it. Other apparent exceptions would be such as "p is a 
very complex proposition" or "P is a proposition about 
Socrates." Mr Wittgenstein maintains, however, for 
reasons which will appear presently, that such exceptions 
are only apparent, and that every function of a proposition 
is really a truth-function. It follows that if we can 
define truth-functions generally, we can obtain a general 
definition of all propositions in terms of the original set 
of atomic propositions. This Wittgenstein proceeds to 
do. 
It has been shown by Dr Sheffer ( Trans. Arn. Math. Soc., 
Vol. XIV. pp. 481-488) that all truth-functions of a given 
set of propositions can be constructed out of either of 
the two functions "not-p or not-q" or "not-p and not-q." 
Wittgenstein makes use of the latter, assuming a know-
13 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INTRODUCTION 
ledge of Dr Sheffer's work. The manner in which other 
truth-functions are constructed out of '' not-p and not-q,, 
is easy to see. "Not-p and not-p" is equivalent to 
'' not-p," hence we obtain a definition of negation in terms 
of our primitive function : hence we can define '' p or q," 
since this is the negation of '' not-p and not-q," i.e. of 
our primitive function. The development of other truth­
functions out of " not-p" and "p or q" is given in detail 
at the beginning of Principia Mathematica. This gives all 
that is wanted when the propositions which are arguments 
to our truth-function are given by enumeration. Wittgen­
stein, however, by a very interesting analysis succeeds in 
extending the process to general propositions, i.e. to cases 
where the propositions which are arguments to our truth­
function are not given by enumeration but are given as 
all those satisfying some condition. For example, let fx 
be a propositional function (i.e. a function whose values 
are propositions), such as "x is human "-then the various 
values of fx form a set of propositions. We may extend 
the idea "not-p and not-q" so as to apply to simultaneous 
denial of all the propositions which are values of fx. In 
this way we arrive at the proposition which is ordinarily 
represented in mathematical logic by the words '' fx 
is false for all values of x." The negation of this would 
be the proposition "there is at least one x for whichfx is 
true" which is represented by "(3x) .fx." If we had 
started with not:fx instead of fx we should have arrived 
at· the proposition "fx is true for all values of x" which 
is represented by "(x) . fx." Wittgenstein's method of 
dealing with general propositions [i.e. " (x) .fx" and 
"(3x). fx "] differs from previous methods by the fact 
that the generality comes only in specifying the set of 
propositions concerned, and when this has been done the 
building up of truth-functions proceeds exactly as it would 
in the case of a finite n um her of enumerated arguments 
P, q, r. . . . 
Mr Wittgenstein's explanation of his symbolism at 
this point is not quite fully given in the text. The symbol 
14 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INTRODUCTION 
he uses is (p, '{, N ({)). The following is the explanation 
of this symbol : 
p stands for all atomic propositions. 
l stands for any set of propositions. 
N ([) stands for the negation of all the propositions 
making up l-
The whole symbol (p, l, N (t)) means whatever can be 
obtained by taking any selection of atomic propositions, 
negating them all, then taking any selection of the set 
of propositions now obtained, together with any of the 
originals-and so on indefinitely. This is, he says, the 
general truth-function and also the general form of pro­
position. What is meant is somewhat less complicated 
than it sounds. The symbol is intended to describe a 
process by the help of which, given the atomic proposi­
tions, all others can be manufactured. The process depends 
upon: 
(a) Sheffer's proof that all truth-functions can be 
obtained out of simultaneous negation, i.e. out of " not-p 
and not-q" ; 
(b) Mr Wittgenstein's theory of the derivation of 
general propositions from conjunctions and disjunctions ; 
(c) The assertion that a proposition can only occur in 
another proposition as argument to a truth -function. 
Given these three foundations, it follows that all pro­
positions which are not atomic can be derived from such 
as are, by a uniform process, and it is this process which 
is indicated by Mr Wittgenstein's symbol. 
From this uniform method of construction we arrive 
at an amazing simplification of the theory of inference, 
as well as a definition of the sort of propositions that 
belong to logic. The method of generation which has 
just been described, enables Wittgenstein to say that all 
propositions can be constructed in the above manner from 
atomic propositions, and in this way the totality of pro­
positions is defined. (The apparent exceptions which we 
mentioned above are dealt with in a manner which we 
15 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INTRODUCTION 
shall consider later.) Wittgenstein is enabled to assert 
that propositions are all that follows from the totality of 
atomic propositions (together with the fact that it is the 
totality of them) ; that a proposition is always a truth­
function of atomic propositions; and that if p follows from 
q the meaning of p is contained in the meaning of q, from 
which of course it results that nothing can be deduced 
from an atomic proposition. All the propositions of logic, 
he maintains, are tautologies, such, for example, as "P 
or not p." 
The fact that nothing can be deduced from an atomic 
proposition has interesting applications, for example, to 
causality. There cannot, in Wittgenstein's logic, be any 
such thing as a causal nexus. " The events of the future," 
he says, "cannot be inferred from those of the present. 
Superstition is the belief in the causal nexus." That the 
sun will rise to-morrow is a hypothesis. We do not in 
fact know whether it will rise, since there is no compulsion 
according to which one thing must happen because another 
happens. 
Let us now take up another subject-that of names. 
In Wittgenstein's theoretical logical language, names are 
only given to simples. We do not give two names to 
one thing, or one name to two things. There is no way 
whatever, according to him, by which we can describe 
the totality of things that can be named, in other words, 
the totality of what there is in the world. In order to be 
able to do this we should have to know of some property 
which must belong to every thing by a logical necessity. 
It has been sought to find such a property in self-identity, 
but the conception of identity is subjected by Wittgenstein 
to a destructive criticism from which there seems no escape. 
The definition of identity by means of the identity of indis­
cernibles is rejected, because the identity of indiscernibles 
appears to be not a logically necessary principle. Accord­
ing to this principle x is identical with y if every property 
of x is a property of y, but it would, after all, be logically 
possible for two things to have exactly the same properties. 
16 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INTRODUCTION 
If this does not in fact happen that is an accidental 
characteristic of the world, not a logically necessary 
characteristic, and accidental characteristics of the world 
must, of course, not be admitted into the structure of 
logic. Mr Wittgenstein accordingly banishes identity 
and adopts the convention that different letters are to 
mean different things. In practice, identity is needed as 
between a name and a description or between two descrip­
tions. It is needed for such propositions as '' Socrates 
is the philosopher who drank the hemlock," or "The 
even prime is the next number after 1." For such uses 
of identity it is easy to provide on Wittgenstein's system. 
The rejection of identity removes one method of 
speaking of the totality of things, and it will be found 
that any other method that may be suggested is equally 
fallacious : so, at least, Wittgenstein contends and, I 
think, rightly. This amounts to saying that "object" is 
a pseudo-concept. To say '' z is an object" is to say 
nothing. It follows from this that we cannot make such 
statements as '' there are more than three objects in the 
world," or "there are an infinite number of objects in 
the world." Objects can only be mentioned in connexion 
with some definite property. We can say '' there are more 
than three objects which are human," or "there are more 
than three objects which are red," for in these statements 
the word object can be replaced by a variable in the 
language of logic, the variable being one which satisfies 
in the first case the function "z is human"; in the second 
the function "z is red." But when we attempt to say 
" there are more than three objects," this substitution of 
the variable for the word "object" becomes impossible, 
and the proposition is therefore seen to be meaningless. 
We here touch one instance of Wittgenstein's funda­
mental thesis, that it is impossible to say anything about 
the world as a whole, and that whatever can be said has 
to be about bounded portions of the world. This view 
may have been originally suggested by notation, and if 
so, that is much in its favour, for a good notation has 
17 B 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INTRODUCTION 
a subtlety and suggestiveness which at times make it 
seem almost like a live teacher. Notational irregularities 
are often the first sign of philosophical errors, and 
a perfect notation would be a substitute for thought. 
But although notation may have first suggested to 
Mr Wittgenstein the limitation of logic to things within 
the world as opposed to the world as a whole, yet the 
view, once suggested, is seen to have much else to 
recommend it. Whether it is ultimately true I do not, 
for my part, profess to know. In this Introduction I 
am concerned to expound it, not to pronounce upon it. 
According to this view we could only say things about 
the world as a whole if we could get outside the world, 
if, that is to say, it ceased to be for us the whole world. 
Our world may be bounded for some superior being who 
can survey it from above, but for us, however finite it 
may be, it cannot have a boundary, since it has nothing 
outside it. Wittgenstein uses, as an analogy, the field 
of vision. Our field of vision does not, for us, have a 
visual boundary, just because there is nothing outside 
it, and in like manner our logical world has no logical 
boundary because our logic knows of nothing outside it. 
These considerations lead him to a somewhat curious 
discussion of Solipsism. Logic, he says, fills the world. 
The boundaries of the world are also its boundaries. In 
logic, therefore, we cannot say, there is this and this in 
the world, but not that, for to say so would apparently 
presuppose that we exclude certain possibilities, and this 
cannot be the case, since it would require that logic 
should go beyond the boundaries of the world as if it 
could contemplate these boundaries from the other side 
also. What we cannot think we cannot think, therefore 
we also cannot say what we cannot think. 
This, he says, gives the key to Solipsism. What 
Solipsism intends is quite correct, but this cannot be 
said, it can only be shown. That the world is niy world 
appears in the fact that the boundaries of language (the 
only language I understand) indicate the boundaries of 
18 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INTRODUGTION 
my world. The metaphysical subject does not belong to 
the world but is a boundary of the world. 
We must take up next the question of molecular pro­
positions which are at first sight not truth-functions, 
of the propositions that they contain, such, for example 
as " A believes p." 
Wittgenstein introduces this subject in the statement 
of his position, namely, that all molecular functions are 
truth-functions. He says (5. 54): " In the general pro­
positional form, propositions occur in a proposition only 
as bases of truth-operations." At first sight, he goes on 
to explain, it seems as if a proposition could also occur 
in other ways, e.g. "A believes p." Here it seems super­
ficially as if the proposition p stood in a sort of relation 
to the object A. '' But it is clear that ' A believes that 
p,' 'A thinks p,' 'A says p' are of the form 'P says p'; 
and here we have no co-ordination of a fact and an object, 
but a co-ordination of facts by means of a co-ordination 
of their objects" (5. 542 ). 
What Mr Wittgenstein says here is said so shortly 
tha_t its point is not likely to be clear to those who have 
not in mind the controversies with which he is concerned. 
The theory with which he is disagreeing will be found 
in my articles on the nature of truth and falsehood in 
Philosophical Essays and Proceedings of the Aristotelian 
Society, 1go6-7. The problem at issue is the problem of 
the logical form of belief, £.e. what is the schema repre­
senting what occurs when a man believes. Of course, the 
problem applies not only to belief, but also to a host of 
other mental phenomena which may be called propositional 
attitudes: doubting, considering, desiring, etc. In all 
these cases it seems natural to express the phenomenon 
in the form "A doubts p," "A desires p," etc., which 
makes it appear as though we were dealing with a relation 
between a person and a proposition. This cannot, of 
course, be the ultimate analysis, since persons are fictions 
and so are propositions, except in the sense in which they 
are facts on their own account. A proposition, considered 
19 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INTRODUCTION 
as a fact on its own account, may be a set of words which 
a man says over to himself, or a complex image, or train 
of images passing through his mind, or a set of incipient 
bodily movements. It may be any one of innumerable 
different things. The proposition as a fact on its own 
account, for example the actual set of words the man 
pronounces to himself, is not relevant to logic. What is 
relevant to logic is that common element among all these 
facts, which enables him, as we say, to mean the fact 
which the proposition asserts. To psychology, of course, 
more is relevant ; for a symbol does not mean what it 
symbolizes in virtue of a logical relation alone, but in 
virtue also of a psychological relation of intention, or 
association, or what-not. The psychological part of mean­
ing, however, does not concern the logician. What does 
concern him in this problem of belief is the logical schema. 
It is clear that, when a person believes a proposition, the 
person, considered as a metaphysical subject, does not 
have to be assumed in order to explain what is happening. 
What has to be explained is the relation between the set 
of words which is the proposition considered as a fact on 
its own account, and the '' objective " fact which makes 
the proposition true or false. This reduces ultimately to 
the question of the meaning of propositions, that is to 
say, the meaning of propositions is the only non-psycho­
logical portion of the problem involved in the analysis 
of belief. This problem is simply one of a relation of 
two facts, namely, the relation between the series of words 
used by the believer and the fact which makes these 
words true or false. The series of words is a fact just 
as much as what makes it true or false is a fact. The 
relation between these two facts is not unanalysable, since 
the meaning of a proposition results from the meaning 
of its constituent words. The meaning of the series of 
words which is a proposition is a function of the meanings 
of the separate words. Accordingly, the proposition as a 
whole does not really enter into what has to be explained 
in explaining the meaning of a proposition. It would 
20 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INTRODUCTION 
perhaps help to suggest the point of view which I am 
trying to indicate, to say that in the cases we have been 
considering the proposition occurs as a fact, not as a 
proposition. Such a statement, however, must not be 
taken too literally. The real point is that in believing, 
desiring, etc., what is logically fundamental is the relation 
of a proposition considered as a fact, to the fact which 
makes it true or false, and that this relation of two facts 
is reducible to a relation of their constituents. Thus the 
proposition does not occur at all in the same sense in 
which it occurs in a truth-function. 
There are some respects, in which, as it seems to me, 
Mr Wittgenstein's theory stands in need of greater 
technical development. This applies in particular to 
his theory of number (6.02 ff.) which, as it stands, is only 
capable of dealing with finite numbers. No logic can 
be considered adequate until it has been shown to be 
capable of dealing with transfinite numbers. I do not 
think there is anything in Mr Wittgenstein's system to 
make it impossible for him to fill this lacuna. 
More interesting than such questions of comparative 
detail is Mr Wittgenstein's attitude towards the mystical. 
His attitude upon this grows naturally out of his doctrine 
in pure logic, according to which the logical proposition 
is a picture (true or false) of the fact, and has in common 
with the fact a certain structure. It is this common 
structure which makes it capable of being a picture of 
the fact, but the structure cannot itself be put into words, 
since it is a structure of words, as well as of the facts to 
which they refer. Everything, therefore, which is involved 
in the very idea of the expressiveness of language must 
remain incapable of being expressed in language, and is, 
therefore, inexpressible in a perfectly precise sense. This 
inexpressible contains, according to Mr Wittgenstein, the 
whole of logic and philosophy. The right method of 
teaching philosophy, he says, would be to confine oneself 
to propositions of the sciences, stated with all possible 
clearness and exactness, leaving philosophical assertions 
21 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INTRODUGTION 
to the learner, and proving to him, whenever he made 
them, that they are meaningless. It is true that the fate 
of Socrates might befall a man who attempted this method 
of teaching, but we are not to be deterred by that fear, if 
it is the only right method. It is not this that causes 
some hesitation in accepting Mr Wittgenstein's position, 
in spite of the very powerful arguments which he brings 
to its support. What causes hesitation is the fact that, 
after all, Mr Wittgenstein manages to say a good deal 
about what cannot be said, thus suggesting to the 
sceptical reader that possibly there may be some loophole 
through a hierarchy of languages, or by some other 
exit. The whole subject of ethics, for example, is placed 
by Mr Wittgenstein in the mystical, inexpressible region. 
Nevertheless he is capable of conveying his ethical 
opinions. His defence would be that what he calls the 
mystical can be shown, although it cannot be said. It 
may be that this defence is adequate, but, for my part, 
I confess that it leaves me with a certain sense of 
intellectual discomfort. 
There is one purely logical problem in regard to 
which these difficulties are peculiarly acute. I mean the 
problem of generality. In the theory of generality it is 
necessary to consider all propositions of the form fx where 
fx is a given propositional function. This belongs to 
the part of logic which can be expressed, according to 
Mr Wittgenstein's system. But the totality of possible 
values of z which might seem to be involved in the totality 
of propositions of the form fx is not admitted by Mr 
Wittgenstein among the things that can be spoken of, 
for this is no other than the totality of things in the world, 
and thus involves the attempt to conceive the world as a 
whole; "the feeling of the world as a bounded whole is 
the mystical"; hence the totality of the values of z is 
mystical (6.45). This is expressly argued when Mr 
Wittgenstein denies that we can make propositions as 
to how many things there are in the world, as for example, 
that there are more than three. 
22 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INTRODUCTION 
These difficulties suggest to my mind some such 
possibility as this: that every language has, as Mr 
\Yittgenstein says, a structure concerning which, in the 
language, nothing can be said, but that there may be 
another language dealing with the structure of the first 
language, and having itself a new structure, and that to 
this hierarchy of languages there may be no limit. Mr 
Wittgenstein would of course reply that his whole theory 
is applicable unchanged to the totality of such languages. 
The only retort would be to deny that there is any such 
totality. The totalities concerning which Mr Wittgenstein 
holds that it is impossible to speak logically are nevertheless 
thought by him to exist, and are the subject-matter of his 
myst1c1sm. The totality resulting from our hierarchy 
would be not merely logically inexpressible, but a fiction, 
a mere delusion, and in this way the supposed sphere of 
the mystical would be abolished. Such an hypothesis is 
very difficult, and I can see objections to it which at the 
moment I do not know how to answer. Yet I do not 
see how any easier hypothesis can escape from Mr 
Wittgenstein's conclusions. Even if this very difficult 
hypothesis should prove tenable, it would leave untouched 
a very large part of Mr Wittgenstein's theory, though 
possibly not the part upon which he himself would wish 
to lay most stress. As one with a long experience of the 
difficulties of logic and of the deceptiveness of theories 
which seem irrefutable, I find myself unable to be sure 
of the rightness of a theory, merely on the ground that I 
cannot see any point on which it is wrong. But to have 
constructed a theory of logic which is not at any point 
obviously wrong is to have achieved a work of extra­
ordinary difficulty and importance. This merit, in my 
opinion, belongs to Mr Wittgenstein's book, and makes 
it one which no serious philosopher can afford to neglect. 
BERTRAND RUSSELL. 
May 1922. 
23 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

/ 
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus 
DEDICATED 
TO THE MEMORY OF MY FRIEND 
DAVID H. PINSENT 
Motto: ... und alles, was man weiss, nicht bloss rauschen 
und brausen gehort hat, lasst sich in drei Worten sagen. 
KU RN BERGER. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

Logisch-Philosophische Abhandlung 
VORWORT 
Dieses Buch wird vielleicht nur der verstehen, der 
die Gedanken, die darin ausgedrtickt sind-oder doch 
ahnliche Gedanken-schon selbst einmal gedacht hat.­
Es ist also kein Lehrbuch.-Sein Zweck ware erreicht, 
wenn es Einem, der es mit Verstandnis liest Vergnilgen 
bereitete. 
Das Buch behandelt die philosophischen Probleme und 
zeigt-wie ich glaube-dass die Fragestellung dieser Prob­
leme auf dem Missverstandnis der Logik unserer Sprache 
beruht. Man konnte den ganzen Sinn des Buches etwa in 
die Worte fassen : Was sich tiberhaupt sagen lasst, lasst 
sich klar sagen ; und wovon man nicht reden kann, dartiber 
muss man schweigen. 
Das Buch will also dem Den ken eine Grenze ziehen, oder 
vielmehr-nicht dem Denken, sondern dem Ausdruck der 
Gedanken: Denn um dem Denken eine Grenze zu ziehen, 
mi.issten wir beide Seiten dieser Grenze denken konnen (wir 
mtissten also denken konnen, was sich nicht denken 
lasst). 
Die Grenze wird also nur in der Sprache gezogen werden 
konnen und was jenseits der Grenze liegt, wird einfach 
U nsinn sein. 
Wieweit meine Bestrebungen mit denen anderer Philo­
sophen zusammenfallen, will ich nicht beurteilen. Ja, was 
ich bier geschrieben habe macht im Einzelnen tiberhaupt 
nicht den Anspruch auf Neuheit; und darum gebe ich auch 
keine Quellen an, weil es mir gleichgtiltig ist, oh das was 
ich gedacht habe, vor mir schon ein anderer gedacht hat. 
26 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus 
PREFACE 
This book will perhaps only be understood by those 
who have themselves already thought the thoughts which 
are expressed in it-or similar thoughts. It is therefore 
not a text-book. Its object would be attained if it 
afforded pleasure to one who read it with under­
standing. 
The book deals with the problems of philosophy and 
shows, as I believe, that the method of formulating these 
problems rests on the misunderstanding of the logic of 
our language. Its whole meaning could be summed up 
somewhat as follows : What can be said at all can be said 
clearly ; and whereof one can not speak thereof one must 
be silent. 
The book will, therefore, draw a limit to thinking, 
or rather-not to thinking, but to the expression of 
thoughts; for, in order to draw a limit to thinking we 
should have to be able to think both sides of this limit 
(we should therefore have to be able to think what cannot 
be thought). 
The limit can, therefore, onJy be drawn in language 
and what lies on the other side of the limit will be simply 
nonsense. 
How far my efforts agree with those of other philo­
sophers I will not decide. Indeed what I have here 
written makes no claim to novelty in points of detail; 
and therefore I give no sources, b~cause it is indifferent 
to me whether what I have thought has already been 
thought before me by another. 
27 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
N ur das will ich erwahnen, <lass ich den grossartigen 
W erken Freges und den Arbeiten meines Freundes Herrn 
Bertrand Russell einen grossen Teil der Anregung zu 
meinen Gedanken schulde. 
Wenn diese Arbeit einen Wert hat, so besteht er in 
Zweierlei. Erstens darin, <lass in ihr Gedanken ausge­
driickt sind, und dieser Wert wird umso grosser sein, je 
besser die Gedanken ausgedrtickt sin d. J e mehr der 
Nagel auf den Kopf getroffen ist.-Hier bin ich mir 
bewusst, weit hinter dem Moglichen zurtickgeblieben zu 
sein. Einfach darum, weil meine Kraft zur Bewaltigung 
der Aufgabe zu gering ist.-Mogen andere kommen und 
es besser machen. 
Dagegen scheint mir die Wahr he it der hier mit­
geteilten Gedanken unantastbar und definitiv. Ich bin 
also der Meinung, die Probleme im Wesentlichen 
endgiiltig gelost zu haben. U nd wenn ich mich hierin 
nicht irre, so besteht nun der Wert dieser Arbeit zweitens 
darin, <lass sie zeigt, wie wenig damit getan ist, <lass 
diese Probleme gelost sind. 
L. W. 
Wien, I9I8. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
I will only mention that to the great works of Frege 
and the writings of my friend Bertrand Russell I owe in 
large measure the stimulation of my thoughts. 
If this work has a value it consists in two things. 
First that in it thoughts are expressed, and this value will 
be the greater the better the thoughts are expressed. The 
more the nail has been hit on the head.-Here I am 
conscious that I have fallen far short of the possible. 
Simply because my powers are insufficient to cope with 
the task.-May others come and do it better. 
On the other hand the truth of the thoughts communi­
cated here seems to me unassailable and definitive. I 
am, therefore, of the opinion that the problems have in 
essentials been finally solved. And if I am not mistaken 
in this, then the value of this work secondly consists in the 
fact that it shows how little has been done when these 
problems have been solved. 
29 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

1* Die Welt ist alles, was der Fall ist. 
I.I Die Welt ist die Gesamtheit der Tatsachen, 
nicht der Dinge. 
I.II Die Welt ist durch die Tatsachen bestimmt und 
dad urch, dass es a 11 e Tatsachen sind. 
I.I2 Denn, die Gesamtheit der Tatsachen bestimmt, 
was der Fall ist und auch, was alles nicht der Fall ist. 
I.I3 Die Tatsachen im logischen Raum sind die Welt. 
I.2 Die Welt zerfallt in Tatsachen. 
I.2I Eines kann der Fall sein oder nicht der Fall sein 
und alles i.ibrige gleich bleiben. 
2 Was der Fall ist, die Tatsache, ist das Bestehen 
von Sachverhalten. 
2.01 Der Sachverhalt ist eine Verbindung von 
Gegenstanden. (Sachen, Dingen.) 
2.011 Es ist dem Ding wesentlich, der Bestandteil 
eines Sachverhaltes sein zu konnen. 
2.012 In der Logik ist nichts zufiillig : Wenn das Ding 
im Sachverhalt vorkommen k an n, so muss die 
Moglichkeit des Sachverhaltes im Ding bereits 
prajudiziert sein. 
2.0121 Es erschiene gleichsam als Zufall, wenn dem 
Ding, das allein filr sich bestehen konnte, nach­
traglich eine Sachlage passen wi.irde. 
Wenn die Dinge in Sachverhalten vorkommen 
konnen, so muss dies schon in ihnen liegen. 
(Etwas Logisches kann nicht nur-moglich sein. 
Die Logik handelt von jeder Moglichkeit und alle 
Moglichkeiten sind ihre Tatsachen.) 
* Die Decimalzahlen als Nummern der einzelnen Satze deuten das logische 
Gcwicht dcr Satze an, den Nachdruck, der auf ihncn in meiner Darstellung liegt, 
Die Satzen. 1, n.2, n.3, etc., sind Bemerkungen zum Satze No. n; die Satzen.m1, 
n.m2, etc. Bemerkungen zum Satze No. n.m; und so weitcr. 
30 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

I The world is everything that is the case.* 
I.I r The world is the totality of facts, not of 
things. 
I.II 
I.12 
.,,..-I.I3 
The world is determined by the facts, and by 
these being all the facts. 
For the totality of facts determines both what is 
the case, and also all that is not the case. 
/ I.2 
The facts in logical space are the world. 
The world divides into facts. 
/' 
,., 
I.2I 
2 
2.0I 
2.0II 
2.012 
Any one can either be the case or not be the 
case, and everything else remain the same, 
What is the case, the fact, is the existence of 
atomic facts. 
An atomic fact is a corn bi nation of objects 
(entities, things). 
It is essential to a thing that it can be a con­
stituent part of an atomic fact. 
In logic nothing is accidental: if a thing can 
occur in an atomic fact the possibility of that 
atomic fact must already be prejudged in the 
thing. 
2.0I2I It would, so to speak, appear as an accident, when 
to a thing that could exist alone on its own account, 
subsequently a state of affairs could be made to fit. 
If things can occur in atomic facts, this possi­
bility must already lie in them. 
(A logical entity cannot be merely possible. 
Logic treats of every possibility, and all possi­
bilities are its facts.) 
* The decimal figures as numbers of the separate propositions indicate the logical 
importance of the propositions, the emphasis laid upon them in my exposition. 
The propositions n. 1, n.2, n.3, etc., are comments on proposition No. n; the pro­
positions n.m1, n.m2, etc., are comments on the proposition No. n.m; and so on. 
31 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
Wie wir uns raumliche Gegenstande iiberhaupt 
nichtausserhalb des Raumes, zeitliche nicht ausser­
halb der Zeit denken konnen, so konnen wir uns 
k e i n en Gegenstand ausserhalb der Moglichkeit 
seiner Verbindung mit anderen denken. 
Wenn ich mir den Gegenstand im Verbande 
des Sachverhalts denken kann, so kann ich ihn 
nicht ausserhalb der Mo g Ii c h k e it dieses Ver­
bandes denken. 
2.0122 Das Ding ist selbstandig, insofern es in alien 
m o g Ii c hen Sachlagen vorkommen kann, aber 
diese Form der Selbstandigkeit ist eine Form des 
Zusammenhangs mit dem Sachverhalt, eine Form 
der U nselbstandigkeit. (Es ist unmoglich, dass 
Worte in zwei verschiedenen W eisen auftreten, 
allein und im Satz.) 
2.or23 Wenn ich den Gegenstand kenne, so kenne ich 
auch samtliche Moglichkeiten seines Vorkommens 
in Sachverhalten. 
(Jede solche Moglichkeit muss in der Natur des 
Gegenstandes liegen.) 
Es kann nicht nachtraglich eine neueMoglichkeit 
gefunden werden. 
2.01231 Um einen Gegenstand zu kennen, muss ich zwar 
nicht seine externen - aber ich muss alle seine 
internen Eigenschaften kennen. 
2.0124 Sind alle Gegenstande gegeben, so sind damit 
auch alle m o g Ii c hen Sachverhalte gegeben. 
2.or3 J edes Ding ist, gleichsam, in einem Raume 
moglicher Sachverhalte. Diesen Raum kann ich 
mir leer denken, nicht aber das Ding ohne den 
Raum. 
2.0131 Der raumliche Gegenstand muss im unendlichen 
Raume liegen. (Der Raumpunkt ist eine Argu­
mentstelle.) 
Der Fleck im Gesichtsfeld muss zwar nicht rot 
sein, aber eine Farbe muss er haben : er hat sozu­
sagen den Farbenraum um sich. Der Ton muss 
32 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
Just as we cannot think of spatial objects at 
all apart from space, or temporal objects apart 
from time, so we cannot think of any object apart 
from the possibility of its connexion with other 
things. 
If I can think of an object in the context of an 
atomic fact, I cannot think of it apart from the 
possibility of this context. 
2.0I22 The thing is independent, in so far as it can 
occur in all posst"ble circumstances, but this form 
of independence is a form of connexion with the 
atomic fact, a form of dependence. (It is im­
possible for words to occur in two different ways, 
alone and in the proposition.) 
2.0123 If I know an object, then I also know all the 
possibilities of its occurrence in atomic facts. 
(Every such possibility must lie in the nature 
of the object.) 
A new possibility cannot subsequently be 
found . 
.,, 2.0I231 In order to know an object, I must know not 
its external but all its internal qualities. 
2.0124 If all objects are given, then thereby are all 
possible atomic facts also given. 
2.013 Every thing is, as it were, in a space of possible 
atomic facts. I can think of this space as empty, 
but not of the thing without the space. 
2.0I3I A spatial object must lie in infinite space. 
(A point in space is an argument place.) 
A speck in a visual field need not be red, 
but it must have a colour ; it has, so to speak, 
a colour space round it. A tone must have a 
33 C 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
2.014 
2.02 
2.0201 
2.021 
2.021! 
2.0212 
2.022 
2.023 
2.0231 
2.0232 
e in e Hohe haben, der Gegenstand des Tastsinnes 
e in e Harte usw. 
Die Gegenstande enthalten die M6glichkeit aller 
Sachlagen. 
Die Moglichkeit seines Vorkommens in Sach­
verhalten, ist die Form des Gegenstandes. 
Der Gegenstand ist einfach. 
J ede Aussage Uber Komplexe lasst sich in eine 
Aussage Uber deren Bestandteile und in diejenigen 
Satze zerlegen, welche die Komplexe vollstandig 
beschreiben. 
Die Gegenstande bilden die Substanz der Welt. 
Darum konnen sie nicht zusammengesetzt sein. 
Hatte die Welt keine Substanz, so wtirde, ob ein 
Satz Sinn hat, davon abhangen, ob ein anderer Satz 
wahr ist. 
Es wace dann unm6glich, ein Bild der Welt 
(wahr oder falsch) zu entwerfen. 
Es ist offenbar, class auch eine von der wirk­
lichen noch so verschieden gedachte Welt Etwas­
eine Form-mit der wirklichen gemein haben muss. 
Diese feste Form besteht eben aus den Gegen­
standen. 
Die Su bstanz der Welt k an n n ur eine Form und 
keine materiellen Eigenschaften bestimmen. Denn 
diese werden erst <lurch die Satze dargestellt-erst 
<lurch die Konfiguration der Gegenstande gebildet. 
Beilaufig gesprochen : Die Gegenstande sind 
farblos. 
2.0233 Zwei Gegenstande von der gleichen logischen 
Form sind-abgesehen von ihren externen Eigen­
schaften-von einander nur dadurch unterschieden, 
dass sie verschieden sind. 
2.02331 Entweder ein Ding hat Eigenschaften, die kein 
anderes hat, dann kann man es ohneweiteres <lurch 
eine Beschreibung aus den anderen herausheben, 
und darauf hinweisen ; oder aber, es gibt mehrere 
Dinge, die ihre samtlichen Eigenschaften gemein-
34 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

fRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
pitch, the object of the sense of touch a hardness, 
etc. 
2.or4 Objects contain the possibility of all states of 
affairs. 
2.or4I The possibility of its occurrence in atomic facts 
is the form of the object. 
2.02 The object is simple. 
2.020I Every statement about complexes can be analysed 
into a statement about their constituent parts, and 
into those propositions which completely describe 
the corn plexes. 
2.02r Objects form the substance of the world. 
Therefore they cannot be compound. 
2.02II If the world had no substance, then whether 
a proposition had sense would depend on whether 
another proposition was true. 
2.02r2 It would then be impossible to form a picture 
of the world (true or false). 
2.022 It is clear that however different from the real 
one an imagined world may be, it must have some­
thing-a form-in common with the real world. 
2.023 This fixed form consists of the objects. 
2.023I The substance of the world can only determine 
a form and not any material properties. For these 
are first presented by the propositions-first formed 
by the configuration of the objects. 
2.0232 Roughly speaking : objects are colourless. 
2.0233 Two objects of the same logical form are-
apart from their external properties-only differen­
tiated from one another in that they are 
different. 
2.02331 Either a thing has properties which no other 
has, and then one can distinguish it straight away 
from the others by a description and refer to it ; 
or, on the other hand, there are several things 
which have the totality of their properties in 
35 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
2.024 
2.025 
2.025r 
2.026 
2.027 
2.027r 
2.0272 
2.03r 
2.032 
2.033 
2.034 
2.05 
2.06 
2.06r 
sam haben, dann ist es iiberhaupt unmoglich auf 
eines von ihnen zu zeigen. 
Denn, ist das Ding <lurch nichts hervorgehoben, 
so kann ich es nicht hervorheben, denn sonst ist 
es eben hervorgehoben. 
Die Substanz ist das, was unabhangig von dem 
was der Fall ist, besteht. 
Sie ist Form und Inhalt. 
Raum, Zeit und Farbe (Farbigkeit) sind Formen 
der Gegenstande. 
Nur wenn es Gegenstande gibt, kann es eine 
feste Form der Welt geben. 
Das Feste, das Bestehende und der Gegenstand 
sind Eins. 
Der Gegenstand ist das F este, Bestehende ; die 
Konfiguration ist das W echselnde, Un bestandige. 
Die Konfiguration der Gegenstande bildet den 
Sachverhalt. 
Im Sachverhalt hangen die Gegenstande inei­
nander, wie die Glieder einer Kette. 
Im Sachverhalt verhalten sich die Gegenstande 
in bestimmter Art und Weise zueinander. 
Die Art und Weise, wie die Gegenstande im 
Sachverhalt zusammenhangen, ist die Struktur 
des Sachverhaltes. 
Die Form ist die Moglichkeit der Struktur. 
Die Struktur der Tatsache besteht aus den 
Strukturen der Sachverhalte. 
Die Gesamtheit der bestehenden Sachverhalte 
ist die Welt. 
Die Gesamtheit der bestehenden Sachverhalte 
bestimmt auch, welche Sachverhalte nicht bestehen. 
Das Bestehen und Nichtbestehen van Sachver­
halten ist die Wirklichkeit. 
(Das Bestehen von Sachverhalten nennen wir 
auch eine positive, das Nichtbestehen eine negative 
Tatsache.) 
Die Sachverhalte sind von einander unabhangig. 
36 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

2.024 
2.027 
2.027I 
2.031 
2.032 
2.05 
2.06 
2.06I 
TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
common, and then it is quite impossible to point 
to any one of them. 
For if a thing is not distinguished by anything, 
I cannot distinguish it-for otherwise it would be 
distinguished. 
Substance is what exists independently of what 
is the case. 
It is form and content. 
Space, time and colour (colouredness) are forms 
of objects. 
Only if there are objects can there be a fixed 
form of the world. 
The fixed, the existent and the object are 
one. 
The object is the fixed, the existent ; the con­
figuration is the changing, the variable. 
The configuration of the objects forms the 
atomic fact. 
In the atomic fact objects hang one in another, 
like the links of a chain. 
In the atomic fact the objects are combined in 
a definite way. 
The way in which objects hang together in 
the atomic fact is the structure of the atomic 
fact. 
The form is the possibility of the structure. 
The structure of the fact consists of the structures 
of the atomic facts. 
The totality of existent atomic facts is the 
world. 
The totality of existent atomic facts also deter­
mines which atomic facts do not exist. 
The existence and non-existence of atomic facts 
is the reality. 
(The existence of atomic facts we also call 
a positive fact, their non-existence a negative 
fact.) 
Atomic facts are independent of one another. 
37 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
2.062 
2.063 
2.I 
2.ll 
2.12 
2.13 
2.131 
2.14 
2.141 
2.r5 
2.151 
Aus dem Bestehen oder Nichtbestehen eines 
Sachverhaltes kann nicht auf das Bestehen oder 
Nichtbestehen eines anderen geschlossen werden. 
Die gesamte Wirklichkeit ist die Welt. 
Wir machen uns Bilder der Tatsachen. 
Das Bildstellt die Sachlage im logischen Raume, 
das Bestehen und Nichtbestehen von Sachverhalten 
vor. 
Das Bild ist ein Modell der Wirklichkeit. 
Den Gegenstanden entsprechen im Bilde die 
Elemente des Bildes. 
Die Elemente des Bildes vertreten im Bild die 
Gegenstande. 
Das Bild besteht darin, dass sich seine Elemente 
in bestimmter Art und Weise zu einander verhalten. 
Das Bild ist eine Tatsache. 
Dass sich die Elemente des Bildes in bestimmter 
Art und Weise zu einander verhalten stellt vcr, 
<lass sich die Sachen so zu einander verhalten. 
Dieser Zusammenhang der Elemente des Bildes 
heisse seine Struktur und ihre Moglichkeit seine 
Form der Abbildung. 
Die Form der Abbildung ist die Moglichkeit, 
class sich die Dinge so zu einander verhalten, wie 
die Elemente des Bildes. 
2.1511 Das Bild ist so mit der \Virklichkeit verkniipft; 
es reicht bis zu ihr. 
2. 1512 Es ist wie ein Masstab an die Wirklichkeit 
angelegt. 
2.15121 N ur die aussersten Punkte der Teilstriche 
be r ii h re n den zu messenden 'Gegenstand. 
2. 1513 Nach dieser Auffassung gehort also zum Bilde 
auch noch die abbildende Beziehung, die es zum 
Bild macht. 
2.1514 Die abbildende Beziehung besteht aus den 
Zuordnungen der Elemente des Bildes und der 
Sachen. 
2. 1515 Diese Zuordnungen sind gleichsam die Ftihler 
38 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

2.062 
/ 2.063 
..-2.1 
2.11 ,,,,,,, 
.,,. 2. 12 
r 2.13 
2.131 / 
2.14 
2.151 
2.1511 
2.1512 
TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
From the existence or non-existence of an 
atomic fact we cannot infer the existence or non­
existence of another. 
The total reality is the world. 
We make to ourselves pictures of facts . 
The picture presents the facts in logical space, 
the existence and non - existence of atomic 
facts. 
The picture is a model of reality . 
To the objects correspond in the picture the 
elements of the picture. 
The elements of the picture stand, in the picture, 
for the objects. 
The picture consists in the fact that its elements 
are combined with one another in a definite way. 
The picture is a fact. 
That the elements of the picture are combined 
with one another in a definite way, represents that 
the things are so corn bined with one another. 
This connexion of the elements of the picture is 
called itsstructure,and the possibilityof this structure 
is called the form of representation of the picture. 
The form of representation is the possibility that 
the things are combined with one another as are 
the elements of the picture. 
Thus the picture is linked with reality; it reaches 
up to it. 
It is like a scale applied to reality. 
2. 15121 Only the ou~ermost points of the dividing lines 
touch the object to be measured. 
2. 1513 According to this view the representing relation 
which makes it a picture, also belongs to the 
picture. 
2. 1514 The representing relation consists of the co-
ordinations of the elements of the picture and the 
things. 
2. 1515 These co-ordinations are as it were the feelers of 
39 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
der Bildelmente, mit denen das Bild die Wirk­
lichkeit berilhrt. 
2.16 Die Tatsache muss um Bild zu sein, etwas mit 
dem Abgebildeten gemeinsam haben. 
2.161 In Bild und Abgebildetem muss etwas identisch 
sein, damit das eine ilberhaupt ein Bild des anderen 
sein kann. 
2. 17 Was das Bild mit der Wirklichkeit gemein 
haben muss, um sie auf seine Art und Weise­
richtig oder falsch-abbilden zu konnen, ist seine 
Form der Abbildung. 
2.171 Das Bild kann jede Wirklichkeit abbilden, 
deren Form es hat. 
Das raumliche Bild alles Raumliche, das farbige 
alles Farbige, etc. 
2.172 Seine Form der Abbildung aber, kann das Bild 
nicht abbilden ; es weist sie auf. 
2. 173 Das Bild stellt sein Objekt von ausserhalb dar 
(sein Standpunkt ist seine Form der Darstellung), 
darum stellt das Bild sein Objekt richtig oder 
falsch dar. 
2.174 Das Bild kann sich aber nicht ausserhalb seiner 
Form der Darstellung stellen. 
2.18 Was jedes Bild, welcher Form immer, mit der 
Wirklichkeit gemein haben muss, um sie ilber­
haupt-richtig oder falsch-abbilden zu kon nen, 
ist die logische Form, das ist, die Form der 
Wirklichkeit. 
2.181 1st die Form der Abbildung die logische Form, 
so heisst das Bild das logische Bild. 
2. 182 J edes Bild ist au c h ein logisches. (Dagegen 
ist z. B. nicht jedes Bild ein raumliches.) 
2. 19 Das logische Bild kann die Welt abbilden. 
2.2 Das Bild hat mit dem Abgebildeten die logische 
Form der Abbildung gemein. 
2.201 Das Bild bildet die Wirklichkeit ab, indem es 
eine Moglichkeit des Bestehens und Nichtbestehens 
von Sachverhalten darstellt. 
40 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

,,,, 2.16 
2.161 
2.17 
2.172 
2.173 
2.174 
/ 2.18 
2.181 
2.182 
- 2.19 
- 2.2 
_2.201 
TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
its elements with which the picture touches 
reality. 
In order to be a picture a fact must have some­
thing in common with what it pictures. 
In the picture and the pictured there must be 
something identical in order that the one can be a 
picture of the other at all. 
What the picture must have in common with 
reality in order to be able to represent it after its 
manner-rightly or falsely-is its form of repre­
sentation. 
The picture can represent every reality whose 
form it has. 
The spatial picture, everything spatial, the 
coloured, everything coloured, etc. 
The picture, however, cannot represent its form 
of representation ; it shows it forth. 
The picture represents its object from without 
(its standpoint is its form of representation), there­
fore the picture represents its object rightly or 
falsely. 
But the picture cannot place itself outside of its 
form of representation. 
What every picture, of whatever form, must 
have in common with reality in order to be able to 
represent it at all-rightly or falsely-is the logical 
form, that is, the form of reality. 
If the form of representation is the logical form, 
then the picture is called a logical picture. 
Every picture is also a logical picture. (On the 
other hand, for example, not every picture is spatial.) 
The logical picture can depict the world. 
The picture has the logical form of representa­
tion in common with what it pictures. 
The picture depicts reality by representing a 
possibility of the existence and non-existence of 
atomic facts. 
41 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
2. 202 Das Bild stellt eine mogliche Sachlage 1m 
logischen Raume dar. 
2.203 Das Bild enthalt die Moglichkeit der Sachlage, 
die es darstellt. 
2.21 Das Bild stimmt mit der Wirklichkeit tiberein 
2.22 
2.221 
2.222 
2.223 
2.224 
2.225 
3 
3.001 
3.01 
3.02 
3.032 
oder nicht; es ist richtig oder unrichtig, wahr 
oder falsch. 
Das Bild stellt dar, was es darstellt, unabhangig 
von seiner Wahr- oder Falschheit, durch die Form 
der Abbildung. 
Was das Bild darstellt, ist sein Sinn. 
In der Ubereinstimmung oder Nichtliberein­
stimmung seines Sinnes mit der Wirklichkeit, 
besteht seine W ahrheit oder Falschheit. 
Um zu erkennen, ob das Bild wahr oder falsch 
ist, mlissen wires mit der Wirklichkeit vergleichen. 
Aus dem Bild allein ist nicht zu erkennen, ob 
es wahr oder falsch ist. 
Ein a priori wahres Bild gibt es nicht. 
Das logische Bild der Tatsachen ist der 
Gedanke. 
,,Ein Sachverhalt ist denkbar" heisst: Wir 
konnen uns ein Bild von ihm machen. 
Die Gesamtheit der wahren Gedanken sind 
ein Bild der Welt. 
Der Gedanke enthalt die Moglichkeit der 
Sachlage die er den kt. Was denkbar ist, ist 
auch moglich. 
Wir konnen nichts U nlogisches denken, weil 
wir sonst unlogisch denken mlissten. 
Man sagte ein mal, <lass Gott alles schaffen 
konne, nur nichts, was den logischen Gesetzen 
zuwider ware.-Wir konnten namlich von einer 
,,unlogischen" Welt nicht sage n, wie sie aussahe. 
Etwas ,,der Logik widersprechendes" in der 
Sprache darstellen, kann man ebensowenig, wie 
in der Geometrie eine den Gesetzen des Raumes 
widersprechende Figur <lurch ihre Koordinaten 
42 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

2.202 
2.203 
2.2! 
2.22 
2.22! 
2.222 
2.223 
2.224 
2.225 
3 
3.001 
3.032 
TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
The picture represents a possible state of affairs 
in logical space. 
The picture contains the possibility of the state 
of affairs which it represents. 
The picture agrees with reality or not ; it is 
right or wrong, true or false. 
The picture represents what it represents, inde­
pendently of its truth or falsehood, through the 
form of representation. 
What the picture represents is its sense. 
In the agreement or disagreement of its sense 
with reality, its truth or falsity consists. 
In order to discover whether the picture is true 
or false we must compare it with reality. 
It cannot be discovered from the picture alone 
whether it is true or false. 
There is no picture which is a priori true. 
The logical picture of the facts is the 
thought. 
'' An atomic fact is thinkable "-means : we can 
imagine it. 
The totality of true thoughts is a picture of the 
world. 
The thought contains the possibility of the state 
of affairs which it thinks. 
What is thinkable is also possible. 
We cannot think anything unlogical, for other­
wise we should have to think unlogically. 
It used to be said that God could create every­
thing, except what was contrary to the laws of logic. 
The truth is, we could not say of an '' unlogical " 
world how it would look. 
To present in language anything which 
"contradicts logic" is as impossible as in 
geometry to present by its co-ordinates a figure 
which contradicts the laws of space ; or to give 
43 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
darstellen ; oder die Koordinaten eines Punktes 
angeben, welcher nicht existiert. 
3.0321 Wohl konnen wir einen Sachverhalt raumlich 
darstellen, welcher den Gesetzen der Physik, 
aber keinen, der den Gesetzen der Geometrie 
zu widerliefe. 
3.04 Ein a priori richtiger Gedanke ware ein solcher, 
<lessen Moglichkeit seine Wahrheit bedingte. 
3.05 N ur so konnten wir a priori wissen, dass ein 
Gedanke wahr ist, wenn aus dem Gedanken 
selbst (ohne Vergleichsobjekt) seine Wahrheit 
zu er ken nen ware. 
3.1 Im Satz driickt sich der Gedanke sinnlich 
wahrnehmbar aus. 
3.11 Wir beniitzen das sinnlich wahrnehmbare 
Zeichen (Laut-oder Schriftzeichen etc.) des Satzes 
als Projektion der moglichen Sachlage. 
Die Projektionsmethode ist das Denken des 
Satz-Sin nes. 
3.12 Das Zeichen, <lurch welches wir den Gedanken 
ausdriicken, nenne ich das Satzzeichen. U nd der 
Satz ist das Satzzeichen in seiner projektiven 
Beziehung zur Welt. 
3.13 Zurn Satz gehort alles, was zur Projektion 
gehort ; aber nicht das Projizierte. 
A_lso die Moglichkeit des Projizierten, aber nicht 
dieses sel ost. 
Im Satz ist also sein Sinn noch nicht enthalten, 
wohl aber die Moglichkeit ihn auszudriicken. 
(,, Der Inhalt des Satzes" heisst der Inhalt des 
sinnvollen Satzes.) 
Im Satz ist die Form seines Sinnes enthalten, 
aber nicht <lessen Inhalt. 
3.14 Das Satzzeichen besteht darin, dass sich seine 
Elernente, die Worter, in ihrn auf bestirnmte Art 
und \Veise zu einander verha.lten. 
Das Satzzeichen ist eine Tatsache. 
3.141 Der Satz ist kein Wortergemisch.-(Wie 
44 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

3.0321 
3.05 
3.1 
3.11 
3;12 
3.13 
TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
the co-ordinates of a point which does not 
exist. 
We could present spatially an atomic fact which 
contradicted the laws of physics, but not one which 
contradicted the laws of geometry. 
An a priori true thought would be one whose 
possibility guaranteed its truth. 
Only if we could know a priori that a thought 
is true if its truth was to be recognized from 
the thought itself (without an object of com­
parison). 
In the proposition the thought is expressed 
perceptibly through the senses. 
We use the sensibly perceptible sign (sound or 
written sign, etc.) of the proposition as a projection 
of the possible state of affairs. . 
The method of projection is the thinking ofj 
the sense of the proposition. 
The sign through which we express the thought'-...1 
I call the propositional sign. And the proposi­
tion is the propositional sign in its projective 
relation to the world. 
To the proposition belongs everything which 
belongs to the projection ; but not what is projected. 
Therefore the possibility of what is projected but 
not this itself. 
In the proposition, therefore, its sense is not yet 
contained, but the possibility of expressing it. 
('' The content of the proposition ,, means· the 
content of the significant proposition.) 
In the proposition the form of its sense is 
contained, but not its content. 
The propositional sign consists in the fact that 
its elements, the words, are combined in it in a 
definite way. 
The propositional sign is a fact. 
The proposition is not a mixture of words 
45 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
das musikalische Thema kein Gemisch von 
Tonen.) 
Der Satz ist artikuliert. 
3.142 N ur Tatsachen konnen einen Sinn ausdri.icken, 
eine Klasse von Namen kann es nicht. 
3.143 Dass das Satzzeichen eine Tatsache ist, wird 
<lurch die gewohnliche Ausdrucksform der Schrift 
oder des Druckes verschleiert. 
Denn im gedruckten Satz z. B. sieht das Satz­
zeichen nicht wesentlich verschieden aus vom 
Wort. 
(So war es moglich, dass Frege den Satz einen 
zusammengesetzten Namen nannte.) 
3.1431 Sehr klar wird das W esen des Satzzeichens, 
wenn wir es uns, statt aus Schriftzeichen, aus 
raumlichen Gegenstanden ( etwa Tischen, Stiihlen, 
Btichern) zusammengesetzt denken. 
Die gegenseitige raumliche Lage dieser Dinge 
drtickt dann den Sinn des Satzes aus. 
3.1432 Nicht: ,,Das komplexe Zeichen ,aRb' sagt, 
dass a in der Beziehung R zu b steht", sondern: 
Dass ,,a" in einer gewissen Beziehung zu ,, b" 
steht, sagt, d ass a Rb. 
3.144 Sachlagen kann man beschreiben, nicht be-
n en n en. 
(Namen gleichen Punkten, Satze Pfeilen, sie 
haben Sinn.) 
3.2 Im Satze kann der Gedanke so ausgedrlickt sein, 
dass den Gegenstanden des Gedankens Elemente 
des Satzzeichens entsprechen. 
3.201 Diese Elemente nenne ich ,,einfache Zeichen" 
und den Satz ,, vollstandig analysiert". 
3.202 Die im Satze angewandten einfachen Zeichen 
heissen Namen. 
3.203 Der Name bedeutet den Gegenstand. Der 
Gegenstand ist seine Bedeutung. (,,A" ist das­
sel be Zeichen wie , , A''.) 
3.21 Der Konfiguration der einfachen Zeichen im 
46 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
Uust as the musical theme is not a mixture of 
tones). 
The proposition is articulate. 
3.142 Only facts can express a sense, a class of names 
cannot. 
3.143 That the propositional sign is a fact is concealed 
by the ordinary form of expression, written or 
printed. 
(For in the printed proposition, for example, the 
sign of a proposition does not appear essentially 
different from a word. Thus it was possible for 
Frege to call the proposition a compounded 
name.) 
3.1431 The essential nature of the propositional sign 
becomes very clear when we imagine it made up 
of spatial objects (such as tables, chairs, books) 
instead of written signs. 
The mutual spatial position of these things then 
expresses the sense of the proposition. 
3.1432 \Ve must not say, '' The complex sign 'aRb' 
says 'a stands in relation R to b'"; but we must 
say, " Tliat 'a' stands in a certain relation to 'b' 
says that aRb ". 
3.144 States of affairs can be described but not 
· named. 
(Names resemble points; propositions resemble 
arrows, they have sense.) 
3.2 In propositions thoughts can be so expressed 
that to the objects of the thoughts correspond the 
elements of the propositional sign. 
3.201 These elements I call "simple signs'' and the 
proposition " corn pletely analysed ". 
3.202 The simple signs employed in propositions are 
called names. 
3. ~03 The name means the object. The object is its 
meaning. ("A" is the same sign as "A".) 
3.21 To the configuration of the simple signs in the 
47 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
3.22 
3.221 
3.23 
3.261 
Satzzeichen entspricht die Konfiguration der Ge­
genstande in der Sachlage. 
Der Name vertritt im Satz den Gegenstand. 
Die Gegenstande kann ich nur nennen. Zeichen 
vertreten sie. Ich kann nur v on ihnen sprechen, 
s i e au s s p re c h e n kan n ich nicht. Ei n Satz 
kann nur sagen, wie ein Ding ist, nicht was es ist. 
Die Forderung der Moglichkeit der einfachen 
Zeichen ist die Forderung der Bestimmtheit des 
Sinnes. 
Der Satz, welcher vom Komplex handelt, steht 
in interner Beziehung zum Satze, der von dessen 
Bestandteil handelt. 
Der Komplex kann nur durch seine Beschrei­
bung gegeben sein, und diese wird stimmen oder 
nicht stimmen. Der Satz, in welchem von einem 
Komplex die Rede ist, wird, wenn dieser nicht 
existiert, nicht unsinnig, sondern einfach falsch sein. 
Dass ein Satzelement einen Komplex bezeichnet, 
kann man aus einer Unbestimmtheit in den Satzen 
sehen, worin es vorkommt. Wir w is s en, durch 
diesen Satz ist noch nicht alles bestimmt. (Die 
Allgemeinheitsbezeichnung en thal t ja ein U rbild.) 
Die Zusammenfassung des Symbols eines Kom­
plexes in ein einfaches Symbol kann durch eine 
Definition ausgedrlickt werden. 
Es gibt eine und nur eine vollstandige Analyse 
des Satzes. 
Der Satz driickt auf bestimmte, klar angebbare 
Weise aus, was er ausdriickt: Der Satz ist artiku-
1 iert. 
Der Name ist <lurch keine Definition weiter zu 
zergliedern : er ist ein U rzeichen. 
J edes definierte Zeichen bezeichnet il be r jene 
Zeichen, durch welche es definiert wurde; und die 
Definitionen weisen den Weg. 
Zwei Zeichen, ein U rzeichen, und ein durch 
U rzeichen definiertes, konnen nicht auf dieselbe 
48 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
propositional sign corresponds the configuration 
of the objects in the state of affairs. 
3.22 In the proposition the name represents the object. 
__ 3.221 Objects I can only name. Signs represent them. 
I can only speak of them. I cannot assert them. 
A proposition can only say how a thing is, not 
what it is. 
3. 23 The postulate of the possibility of the simple 
signs is the postulate of the determinateness of 
the sense. 
3.24 A proposition about a complex stands in 
internal relation to the proposition about its 
constituent part. 
A complex can only be given by its description, 
and this will either be right or wrong. The pro­
position in which there is mention of a complex, 
if this does not exist, becomes not nonsense but 
simply false11 
That a propositional element signifies a complex 
can be seen from an indeterminateness in the pro­
positions in which it occurs. We know that every­
thing is not yet determined by this proposition. 
(The notation for generality contains a prototype.) 
The combination of the symbols of a complex 
in a simple symbol can be expressed by a defini­
tion. 
3.25 There is one and only one complete analysis of 
the proposition. 
3.251 The proposition expresses what it expresses in 
a definite and clearly specifiable way : the pro­
position is articulate. 
3.26 The name cannot be analysed further by any 
definition. It is a primitive sign. 
3.261 Every defined sign signifies via those signs 
by which it is defined, and the definitions show 
the way. 
Two signs, one a primitive sign, and one 
defined by primitive signs, cannot signify in the 
49 D 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
Art und Weise bezeichnen. N amen k a n n man 
nicht <lurch Definitionen auseinanderlegen. (Kein 
Zeichen, welches allein, selbstandig eine Bedeutung 
hat.) 
3.262 Was in den Zeichen nichtzum Ausdruck kommt, 
das zeigt ihre Anwendung. Was die Zeichen 
verschlucken, das spricht ihre Anwendung aus. 
3.263 Die Bedeutungen von U rzeichen konnen durch 
Erlauterungen erklart werden. Erlauterungen 
sind Satze, welche die U rzeichen enthalten. Sie 
konnen also nur verstanden werden, wenn die 
Bedeutungen dieser Zeichen bereits bekannt sind. 
3.3 Nur der Satz hat Sinn; nur im Zusammenhange 
des Satzes hat ein Name Bedeutung. 
3.31 J eden Teil des Satzes, der seinen Sinn charak-
terisiert, nenne ich einen Ausdruck (ein Symbol). 
(Der Satz selbst ist ein Ausdruck.) 
Ausdruck ist alles, fiir den Sinn des Satzes 
wesentliche, was Satze miteinander gemein haben 
konnen. 
De,r Ausdruck kennzeichnet eine Form und 
einen Inhalt. 
3.311 Der Ausdruck setzt die Formen aller Satze 
voraus, in welchen er vorkommen kann. Er ist 
das gemeinsame charakteristische Merkmal einer 
Klasse von Satzen. 
3.312 Er wird also dargestellt durch die allgemeine 
Form der Satze, die er charakterisiert. 
U nd zwar wird in dieser Form der Ausdruck 
k ons tan t und alles iibrige v aria be I sein. 
3.313 Der Ausdruck wird also <lurch eine Variable 
dargestellt, deren Werte die Satze sind, die den 
Ausdruck enthalten. 
(Im Grenzfall wird die Variable zur Konstanten, 
der Ausdruck zum Satz.) 
Ich nenne eine solche Variable ,,Satzvariable". 
3.314 Der Ausdruck hat nur im Satz Bedeutung. 
J cde Variable lasst sich als Satzvariable auffassen. 
50 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
same way. Names cannot be taken to pieces by 
definition (nor any sign which alone and independ­
ently has a meaning). 
3. 262 What does not get expressed in the sign is 
shown by its application. What the signs conceal, 
their application declares. 
3.263 The meanings of primitive signs can be 
explained by elucidations. Elucidations are pro­
positions which contain the primitive signs. They 
can, therefore, only be understood when the 
meanings of these signs are already known. 
3.3 Only the proposition has sense; only in the 
context of a proposition has a name meaning. 
3.31 Every part of a proposition which characterizes 
its sense I call an expression (a symbol) 
(The proposition itself is an expression.) 
Expressions are everything-essential for the 
sense of the proposition-that propositions can 
have in common with one another. 
An expression characterizes a form and a 
content. 
3.311 An expression presupposes the forms of all 
propositions in which it can occur. It is the 
common characteristic mark of a class of pro­
positions. 
3.312 It is therefore represented by the general form 
of the propositions which it characterizes. 
And in this form the expression is constant and 
everything else vanable. 
3.313 An expression is thus presented by a variable, 
whose values are the propositions which contain 
the expression. 
(In the limiting case the variable becomes 
constant, the expression a proposition.} 
I call such a variable a "propositional variable". 
3.314 An expression has meaning only in a pro-
position. Every variable can be conceived as a 
propositional variable. 
51 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
(Auch der variable Name.) 
Verwandeln wir einen Bestandteil eines Satzes 
in eine Variable, so gibt es eine Klasse von Satzen, 
welche samtlich W erte des so entstandenen varia­
blen Satzes sind. Diese Klasse hangt im allge­
meinen noch davon ab, was wir, nach willkiirlicher 
Ubereinkunft, mit Teilen jenes Satzes meinen. 
Verwandeln wir aber alle jene Zeichen, deren 
Bedeutung willkilrlich bestimmt wurde, in Variable, 
so gibt es nun noch immer eine solche Klasse. 
Diese aber ist nun von keiner Ubereinkunft 
abhangig, sondern nur noch von der Natur des 
Satzes. Sie entspricht einer logischen Form­
einem logischen U rbild. 
3.316 Welche Werte die Satzvariable annehmen darf, 
wird festgesetzt. 
Die Festsetzung der Werte is t die Variable. 
3.317 Die Festsetzung der Werte der Satzvariablen 
ist die A n g a be de r Satz e, deren gemeinsames 
Merkmal die Variable ist. 
Die Festsetzung ist eine Beschreibung dieser 
Satze. 
Die Festsetzung wird also nur von Symbolen, 
nicht von deren Bedeutung handeln. 
U nd nu r dies ist der Festsetzung wesentlich, 
dass sie nur eine Beschreibung von 
S y m b o 1 e n i s t u n d n i c h t s il b e r d a s B e­
z e i c h n e t e a u s s a g t. 
Wie die Beschreibung der Satze geschieht, ist 
unwesentlich. 
3.318 Den Satz fasse ich-wie Frege und Russell-
als Funktion der in ihm enthaltenen Ausdriicke auf. 
3.32 Das Zeichen ist das sinnlich Wahrnehmbare am 
Symbol. 
3.321 Zwei verschiedene Symbole konnen also das 
Zeichen (Schriftzeichen oder Lautzeichen etc.) 
miteinander gemein haben-sie bezeichnen dann 
auf verschiedene Art und Weise. 
52 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
(Including the variable name.) 
3.315 If we change a constituent part of a proposition 
into a variable, there is a class of propositions 
which are all the values of the resulting variable 
proposition. This class in general still depends 
on what, by arbitrary agreement, we mean by 
parts of that proposition. But if we change all 
those signs, whose meaning was arbitrarily deter­
mined, into variables, there always remains such 
a class. But this is now no longer dependent on 
any agreement; it depends only on the nature of 
the proposition. It corresponds to a logical form, 
to a logical prototype. 
3.316 What values the propositional variable can 
assume is determined. 
The determination of the values is the variable. 
3.317 The determination of the values of the pro-
positional variable is done by indicating the pro­
positions whose common mark the variable is. 
The determination is a description of these 
propositions. 
The determination will therefore deal only with 
symbols not with their meaning. 
And only this is essential to the determination, 
that it is only a descr£ptz"on of symbols and asserts 
noth£ng about what £s symbolized. 
The way in which we describe the propositions 
is not essential. 
3.318 I conceive the proposition-like Frege and 
Russell-as a function of the expressions contained 
in it. -
3. 32 The sign is the part of the symbol perceptible 
by the senses. 
3.321 Two different symbols can therefore have the 
sign {the written sign or the sound sign) m 
common-they then signify in different ways. 
53 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
3.322 Es kann nie das gemeinsame Merkmal zweier 
Gegenstande anzeigen, dass wir sie mit demselben 
Zeichen, aber <lurch zwei verschiedene Bez e i c h­
n u n g s we is en bezeichnen. Denn das Zeichen 
ist ja willki.irlich. Man konnte also auch zwei ver­
schieden.e Zeichen wahlen, und wo bliebe dann das 
Gemeinsame in der Bezeichnung. 
3.323 In der Umgangssprache kommt es ungemein 
haufig vor, dass dasselbe Wort auf verschiedene 
Art und Weise bezeichnet - also verschiedenen 
Symbolen angehort - , oder, dass zwei Worter, 
die auf verschiedene Art und Weise bezeichnen, 
ausserlich in der gleichen Weise im Satze ange­
wandt werden. 
So erscheint das Wort ,,ist" als Kopula, als 
Gleichheitszeichen und als Ausdruck der Existenz; 
,,existieren" als intransitives Zeitwort wie ,,gehen" ; 
,,identisch" als Eigenschaftswort ; wir reden_ von 
Et was, aber auch davon, dass et was geschieht. 
(Im Satze ,,Griin ist gri.in"-wo das erste Wort 
ein Personenname, das letzte ein Eigenschaftswort 
ist-haben diese Worte nicht einfach verschiedene 
Bedeutung, sondern es sind v e r s c h i e de n e 
Sy m bo I e.) 
3.324 So entstehen leicht die fundamentalsten Ver-
wechsl ungen ( deren die ganze Philosophie voll 
ist). 
3.325 Um diesen Irrti.imern zu entgehen, miissen 
wir eine Zeichensprache verwenden, welche sie 
ausschliesst, indem sie nicht das gleiche Zeichen 
in verschiedenen Symbolen, und Zeichen, welche 
auf verschiedene Art bezeichnen, nicht ausserlich 
auf die gleiche Art verwendet. Eine Zeichensprache 
also, die der I o g is c hen Grammatik-der logi­
schen Syntax-gehorcht. 
(Die Begriffsschrift Frege's und Russell's ist 
eine solche Sprache, die allerdings noch nicht alle 
F ehler ausschliesst.) 
54 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
3.322 It can never indicate the common characteristic 
of two objects that we symbolize them with the 
same signs but by different methods of symbolizing. 
For the sign is arbitrary. We could therefore 
equally well choose two different signs and 
where then would be what was common in the 
symbolization. 
3.323 In the language of everyday life it very often 
happens that the same word signifies in two dif­
ferent ways-and therefore belongs to two different 
symbols - or that two words, which signify in 
different ways, are apparently applied in the same 
way in the proposition. 
Thus the word ''is" appears as the copula, 
as the sign of equality, and as the expression of 
existence ; "to exist" as an intransitive verb like 
"to go'' ; "identical" as an adjective ; we speak 
of something but also of the fact of something 
happening. 
(In the proposition "Green is green "-where 
the first word is a proper name and the last an 
adjective-these words have not merely different 
meanings but they are different symbols.) 
3.324 Thus there easily arise the most fundamental 
confusions (of which the whole of philosophy is 
full). 
3.325 In order to avoid these errors, we must employ 
a symbolism which excludes them, by not apply­
ing the same sign in different symbols and by 
not applying signs in the same way which signify 
in different ways. A symbolism, that is to say, 
which obeys the rules of logical grammar-of logical 
syntax. 
(The logical symbolism of Frege and Russell 
is such a language, which, however, does still not 
exclude all errors.) 
55 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
3.326 Um das Symbol am Zeichen zu erkennen, muss 
man auf den sinnvollen Gebrauch achten. 
3.327 Das Zeichen bestimmt erst mit seiner logisch-
syntaktischen Verwendung zusammen eine logische 
Form. 
3.328 Wird ein Zeichen n i c h t g e bra u c h t, so ist 
es bedeutungslos. Das ist der Sinn der Devise 
Occams. 
(Wenn sich alles so verhalt als hatte ein Zeichen 
Bedeutung, dann hat es auch Bedeutung.) 
3.33 In der logischen Syntax darf nie die Bedeutung 
eines Zeichens eine Rolle spielen ; sie muss sich 
aufstellen }assen, ohne dass dabei von der Bede u­
t u n g eines Zeichens die Rede ware, sie darf n u r 
die Beschreibung der Ausdrticke voraussetzen. 
3.331 Von dieser Bemerkung sehen wir in Russell's 
,,Theory of types" hintiber: Der Irrtum Russell's 
zeigt sich darin, dass er bei der Aufstellung der 
Zeichenregeln von der Bedeutung der Zeichen 
red en m usste. 
3.332 Kein Satz kann etwas iiber sich selbst aussagen, 
weil das Satzzeichen nicht in sich selbst enthalten 
sein kann, ( das ist die ganze ,,Theory of types"). 
3.333 Eine Funktion kann darum nicht ihr eigenes 
Argument sein, weil das Funktionszeichen bereits 
das Urbild seines Arguments enthalt und es sich 
nicht selbst enthalten kann. 
Nehmen wir namlich an, die Funktion F (fx) 
konnte ihr eigenes Argument sein ; dann gabe es 
also einen Satz: ,,F(F(fx))" und in diesem mlissen 
die aussere Funktion F und die innere Funktion F 
verschiedene Bedeutungen haben, denn die innere 
hat die Form <J,(fx), die aussere, die Form y,(<J,(fx)). 
Gemeinsam ist den beiden Funktionen nur der 
Buchstabe ,,F", der aber allein nichts bezeichnet. 
Dies wird sofort klar, wenn wir statt ,,F(F(u))" 
schreiben ,,(3<j>): F(<jlu). <jlu=Fu". 
Hiermit erledigt sich Russell's Paradox. 
56 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
3.326 In order to recognize the symbol in the sign 
we must consider the significant use. 
3.327 The sign determines a logical form only to-
gether with its logical syntactic application. 
3.328 If a sign is not necessary then it is meaningless. 
That is the meaning of Occam's razor. 
(If everything in the symbolism works as 
though a sign had meaning, then it has mean­
ing.) 
3.33 In logical syntax the meaning of a sign ought 
never to play a role ; it must admit of being 
established without mention being thereby made 
of the meaning of a sign ; it ought to presuppose 
only the description of the expressions. 
3.331 From this observation we get a further view-
into Russell's Tlieor;1 of T;,pes. Russell's error is 
shown by the fact that in drawing up his sym­
bolic rules he has to speak about the things his 
signs mean. 
3.332 No proposition can say anything about itself, 
because the propositional sign cannot be contained 
in it5elf (that is the "whole theory of types''). 
3.333 A function cannot be its own argument, be-
cause the functional sign already contains the proto­
type of its own argument and it cannot contain 
itself. 
If, for example, we suppose that the function 
F(fx) could be its own argument, then there would 
be a proposition "F(F(fx)) ", and in this the outer 
function F and the inner function· F must have 
different meanings; for the inner has the form 
<P(fx), the outer the form 'V( <J>(fx)). Common to 
both functions is only the letter '' F ", which by 
itself signifies nothing. 
This is at once clear, if instead of "F(F(u))" we 
write " ( 3 <P) : F( <j>u) • cpu =Fu". 
Herewith Russell's paradox vanishes. 
57 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
3.334 Die Regeln der logischen Syntax milssen sich 
von selbst verstehen, wenn man nur weiss, wie 
ein jedes Zeichen bezeichnet. 
3.34 Der Satz besitzt wesentliche und zufallige Ztige. 
Zufallig sind die Zilge, die von der besonderen 
Art der Hervorbringung desSatzzeichens herrtihren. 
Wesentlich diejenigen, welche allein den Satz be­
fahigen, seinen Sinn auszudrticken. 
3.34r Das Wesentliche am Satz ist also das, was alien 
Satzen, welche den gleichen Sinn ausdrticken 
konnen, gemeinsam ist. 
U nd ebenso ist allgemein das W esentliche am 
Symbol das, was alle Symbole, die denselben 
Z week erftillen konnen, gemeinsam haben. 
3.34II Man konnte also sagen: Der eigentliche Name 
ist das, was alle Symbole, die den Gegenstand 
bezeichnen, gemeinsam haben. Es wiirde sich so 
successive ergeben, dass keinerlei Zusammense­
tzung fiir den N amen wesentlich ist. 
3.342 An unseren Notationen ist zwar etwaswillkilrlich, 
aber d as ist nicht willkilrlich: Dass, we n n wir 
etwas willktirlich bestimmt haben, dann etwas 
anderes der Fall sein m uss. (Dies hangt von dem 
Wes ender Notation ab.) 
3.3421 Eine besondere Bezeichnungsweise mag un-
wichtig sein, aber wichtig ist es immer, dass diese 
eine m o g l i c he Bezeichnungswei~e ist. Und so 
verhalt es sich in der Philosophie ilberhaupt: Das 
Einzelne erweist sich immer wieder als unwichtig, 
aber die Moglichkeit jedes Einzelnen gibt uns 
einen Aufschluss i.iber das Wesen der Welt. 
3.343 Definitionen sind Regeln der Ubersetzung von 
ei ner Sprache in eine andere. J ede richtige Zeichen­
sprache muss sich in jede andere nach solchen 
Regel n i.i bersetzen lassen : D i e s ist, was sie alle 
gemeinsam haben. 
3.344 Das, was am Symbol bezeichnet, ist das Gemein-
same aller jener Sym bole, durch die das erste den 
58 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
3.334 The rules of logical syntax must follow of them-
selves, if we only know how every single sign 
signifies. 
3.34 A proposition possesses essential and accidental 
features. 
Accidental are the features which are due to a 
particular way of producing the propositional sign. 
Essential are those which alone enable the pro­
position to express its sense. 
3!341 The essential in a proposition is therefore that 
which is common to all propositions which can 
express the same sense. 
And in the same way in general the essential in 
a symbol is that which all symbols which can 
fulfil the same purpose have in common. 
3.3411 One could therefore say the real name is that 
which all symbols, which signify an object, have 
in common. It would then follow, step by step, 
that no sort of composition was essential for a name. 
3.342 In our notations there is indeed something 
arbitrary, but this is not arbitrary, namely that 
if we have determined anything arbitrarily, then 
something else must be the case. (This results 
from the essence of the notation.) 
3.3421 A particular method of symbolizing may be 
unimportant, but it is always important that this 
is a possz'ble method of symbolizing. And this 
happens as a rule in philosophy : The single 
thing proves over and over again to be unimportant, 
but the possibility of every single thing reveals 
something about the nature of the world. 
3.343 Definitions are rules for the translation of one 
language into another. Every correct symbolism 
must be translatable into every other according 
to such rules. It is this which all have m 
common. 
3.344 What signifies in the symbol is what 1s 
common to all those symbols by which it can 
59 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
Regeln der logischen Syntax zufolge ersetzt werden 
kann. 
3.3441 Man kann z. B. das Gemeinsame aller Notationen 
3.3442 
3.4 
3.41 
3.411 
3.42 
3.5 
4 
4.001 
4.002 
filr die W ahrheitsfunktionen so ausdrilcken : Es ist 
ihnen gemeinsam, dass sich alle-z. B.-durch die 
Notation von,,,.,, p" (,,nicht p") und,,p v q"(,,p oder q") 
e r set z e n I ass e n. 
(Hiermit ist die Art und Weise gekennzeichnet, 
wie eine spezielle mogliche Notation uns allgemeine 
Aufschliisse geben kann.) 
Das Zeichen des Korn plexes lost sich auch bei 
der Analyse nicht willkilrlich auf, so dass etwa seine 
Auflosung in jedem Satzgefilge eine andere ware. 
Der Satz bestimmt einen Ort im logischen Raum. 
Die Existenz dieses logischen Ortes ist durch die 
Existenz der Bestandteile allein verbilrgt, durch die 
Existenz des sinnvollen Satzes. 
Das Satzzeichen und die logischen Koordinaten: 
Das ist der logische Ort. 
Der geometrische und der logische Ort stimmen 
darin iiberein, dass beide die Moglichkeit einer 
Existenz sind. 
Obwohl der Satz nur einen Ort des logischen 
Raumes bestimmen darf, so muss doch durch 
ihn schon der ganze logische Raum gegeben 
se1n. 
(Sonst wiirdendurch die Verneinung, die logische 
Summe, das logische Produkt, etc. immer neue 
Elemente-in Koordination-eingefiihrt.) 
(Das logische Geriist um das Bild herum bestimmt 
den logischen Raum. Der Satz durchgreift den 
ganzen logischen Raum.) 
Das angewandte, gedachte, Satzzeichen ist der 
Gedanke. 
Der Gedanke ist der sinnvolle Satz. 
Die Gesamtheit der Satze ist die Sprache. 
Der Mensch besitzt die Fahigkeit Sprachen zu 
bauen, womit sich jeder Sinn ausdrilcken lasst, 
60 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

3.344r 
3.3442 
3.4 
3.4rr 
3.42 
3.5 
4 
4.001 
4.002 
TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
be replaced according to the rules of logical 
syntax. 
We can, for example, express what is common to 
all notations for the truth-functions as follows : It 
is common to them that they all, for example, can 
be replaced by the notations of '' ,,.,, p " ('' not p ") 
and "pvq" ("P or q "). 
(Herewith is indicated the way in which a special 
possible notation can give us general informa­
tion_.) 
The sign of the complex is not arbitrarily 
resolved in the analysis, in such a way that its 
resolution would be different in every propositional 
structure. 
The proposition determines a place in logical 
space : the existence of this logical place is guaran­
teed by the existence of the constituent parts alone, 
by the existence of the significant proposition. 
The propositional sign and the logical co­
ordinates : that is the logical place. 
The geometrical and the logical place agree in 
that each is the possibility of an existence. 
Although a proposition may only determine 
one place in logical space, the whole logical space 
must already be given by it. 
(Otherwise denial, the logical sum, the logical 
product, etc., would always introduce new elements 
-in co-ordination.) 
(The logical scaffolding round the picture deter­
mines the logical space. The proposition reaches 
through the whole logical space.) 
The applied, thought, propositional sign is the 
thought. 
The thought is the significant proposition. 
The totality of propositions is the language. 
Man possesses the capacity of constructing 
languages, in which every sense can be expressed, 
61 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
ohne eine Ahnung davon zu haben, wie und was 
jedes Wort bedeutet.-Wie man auch spricht, ohne 
zu wissen, wie die einzelnen Laute hervorgebracht 
werden. 
Die U mgangssprache ist ein Teil des menschli­
chen Organism us und nicht weniger kompliziert als 
dieser. 
Es ist menschenunmoglich, die Sprachlogik aus 
ihr unmittelbar zu entnehmen. 
Die Sprache verkleidet den Gedanken. U nd 
zwar so, dass man nach der ausseren Form des 
Kleides, nicht auf die Form des bekleideten Gedan­
kens schliessen kann ; weil die aussere Form des 
Kleides nach ganz anderen Zwecken gebildet ist, als 
danach, die Form des Korpers erkennen zu lassen. 
Die stillschweigenden Abmachungen zum Ver­
standnis der Umgangssprache sind enorm komp­
liziert. 
4.003 Die meisten Satze und Fragen, welche iiber 
philosophische Dinge geschrieben worden sind, sind 
nicht falsch, sondern unsinnig. Wir konnen daher 
Fragen dieser Art ilberhaupt nicht beantworten, 
sondern nur ihre U nsinnigkeit feststellen. Die 
meisten Fragen und Satze der Philosophen beruhen 
darauf, das wir unsere Sprachlogik nicht verstehen. 
(Sie sind von der Art der Frage, ob das Gute 
mehr oder weniger identisch sei als das Schone.) 
U nd es ist nicht verwunderlich, dass die tiefsten 
Probleme eigentlich k e i n e Probleme sind. 
4.0031 Alie Philosophie ist ,,Sprachkritik". (Allerdings 
nicht im Sinne Mauthners.) Russell's Verdienst ist 
es, gezeigt zu haben, dass die scheinbare logische 
Form des Satzes nicht seine wirkliche sein muss. 
4.01 Der Satz ist ein Bild der Wirklichkeit. 
Der Satz ist ein Modell der Wirklichkeit, so wie 
wir sie uns denken. 
4.011 Auf den ersten Blick scheint der Satz-wie er 
etwa auf dem Papier gedruckt steht-kein Bild der 
62 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOG ICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
without having an idea how and what each word 
means-just as one speaks without knowing how 
the single sounds are produced. 
Colloquial language is a part of the human 
organism and is not less complicated than it 
From it it is humanly impossible to gather 
immediately the logic of language. 
Language disguises the thought ; so that from 
the external form of the clothes one can not infer 
the form of the thought they clothe, because the 
external form of the clothes is constructed with 
quite another object than to let the form of the 
body be recognized. 
The silent adjustments to understand colloquial 
language are enormously complicated. 
4.003 Most propositions and questions, that have been 
written about philosophical matters, are not false, but 
senseless. We cannot, therefore, answer questions 
of this kind at all, but only state their senselessness. 
Most questions and propositions of the philosophers 
result from the fact that we do not understand the 
logic of our language. 
(They are of the same kind as the question 
whether the Good is more or less identical than the 
Beautiful.) 
And so it is not to be wondered at that the 
deepest problems are really no problems. 
4.0031 All philosophy is "Critique of language" (but 
not at all in Mauthner's sense). Russell's merit is 
to have shown that the apparent logical form of the 
proposition need not be its real form. 
4.01 The proposition is a picture of reality. 
The proposition is a model of the reality as we 
think it is. 
4.011 At the first glance the proposition-say as it 
stands printed on paper-does not seem to be a 
63 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
Wirklichkeit zu sein, von der er handelt. Aber 
auch die N otenschrift scheint auf den ersten Blick 
kein Bild der M usik zu sein, und unsere Lautzeichen­
(Buchstaben-)Schrift kein Bild unserer Lautsprache. 
U nd doch erweisen sich diese Zeichensprachen 
auch im gewohnlichen Sinne als Bilder <lessen, was 
sie darstellen. 
4.012 Offenbar ist, class wir einen Satz von der Form 
,,aRb" als Bild empfinden. Hier ist das Zeichen 
offen bar ein Gleichnis des Bezeichneten. 
4.013 U nd wenn wir in das Wesentliche dieser Bild-
haftigkeit eindringen, so sehen wir, dass dieselbe 
du rch s c h e i n b a r e U n r e g e l m a s s i g k e i t e n 
(wie die Verwendung der# und binder Notenschrift) 
n i c h t gestort wird. 
Denn auch diese U nregelmassigkeiten bilden 
das ab, was sie ausdrticken sollen ; n ur auf eine 
andere Art und Weise. 
4.014 Die Grammophonplatte, der musikalische Ge-
danke, die Notenschrift, die Schallwellen, stehen 
alle in jener abbildenden internen Beziehung zu 
einander, die zwischen Sprache und Welt besteht. 
Ihnen alien ist der logische Bau gemeinsam. 
(Wie im Marchen die zwei J tinglinge, ihre zwei 
Pferde und ihre Lilien. Sie sind alle in gewissem 
Sinne Eins.) 
4.0141 Dass es eine allgemeine Regel gibt, durch die 
der Musiker aus der Partitur die Symphonie 
entnchmen kann, durch welche man aus der Linie 
auf der Grammophonplatte die Symphonie und 
nach der ersten Regel wieder die Partitur ableiten 
kann, darin besteht eben die innere Ahnlichkeit 
dieser scheinbar so ganz verschiedenen Gebilde. 
U nd jene Regel ist das Gesetz der Projektion, 
welches die Symphonie in die N otensprache pro­
J 1z1ert. Sie ist die Regel der Ubersetzung der 
N otensprache in die Sprache derGram mophon platte. 
4.015 Die Moglichkeit aller Gleichnisse, der ganzen 
64 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
picture of the reality of which it treats. But nor 
does the musical score appear at first sight to be a 
picture of a musical piece ; nor does our phonetic 
spelling (letters) seem to be a picture of our spoken 
language. And yet these symbolisms prove to be 
pictures-even in the ordinary sense of the word 
-of what they represent. 
4.012 It is obvious that we perceive a proposition 
of the form aRb as a picture. Here the sign is 
obviously a likeness of the signified. 
4.013 And if we penetrate to the essence of·· this 
pictorial nature we see that this is not disturbed 
by apparent £rregularities (like the use of# and b in 
the score). 
For these irregularities also picture what they 
are to express; only in another way. 
4.014 The gramophone record, the musical thought, 
the score, the waves of sound, all stand to one 
another in that pictorial internal relation, which 
holds between language and the world. 
To all of them the logical structure is common. 
(Like the two youths, their two horses and their 
lilies in the story. They are all in a certain sense 
one.) 
4.0141 In the fact that there is a general rule by which 
the musician .is able to read the symphony out of 
the score, and that there is a rule by which one 
could reconstruct the symphony from the line on 
a gramophone record and from this again-by 
means of the first rule-construct the score, herein 
lies the internal similarity between these things 
which at first sight seem to be entirely different. 
And the rule is the law of projection which projects 
the symphony into the language of the musical 
score. It is the rule of translation of this language 
into the language of the gramophone record. 
4.015 The possibility of all similes, of all the 
65 E 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
Bildhaftigkeit unserer Ausdrucksweise, ruht in der 
Logik der Abbildung. 
4.016 Um das Wesen des Satzes zu verstehen, denken 
wir an die Hieroglyphenschrift, welche die Tatsachen 
die sie beschreibt abbildet. 
U nd aus ihr wurde die Buchstabenschrift, ohne 
das Wesentliche der Abbildung zu verlieren. 
4.02 Dies sehen wir daraus, dass wir den Sinn des 
Satzzeichens verstehen, ohne dass er uns erklart 
wurde. 
4.021 Der Satz ist ein Bild der Wirklichkeit : Denn 
ich kenne die von ihm dargestellte Sachlage, wenn 
ich den Satz verstehe. U nd den Satz verstehe ich, 
ohne dass mir sein Sinn erklart wurde. 
4.022 Der Satz z e i g t seinen Sinn. 
Der Satz z e i g t, wie es sich verhalt, we n n er 
wahr ist. U nd er sag t, d a s s es sich so verhalt. 
4.023 Die Wirklichkeit muss durch den Satz auf ja 
oder· nein fixiert sein. 
Dazu muss sie durch ihn vollstandig beschrieben 
werden. 
Der Satz istdie Beschrei bungeines Sachverhaltes. 
Wie die Beschreibung einen Gegenstand nach 
seinen externen Eigenschaften, so beschreibt der 
Satz die Wirklichkeit nach ihren internen Eigen­
schaften. 
Der Satz konstruiert eine Welt mit Hilfe eines 
logischen Gertistes und darum kann man am Satz 
auch sehen, wie sich alles Logische verhalt, we n n 
er wahr ist. Man kann aus einem falschen Satz 
S c h I ti s s e z i eh e n. 
4.024 Einen Satz verstehen, heisst, wissen was der 
Fall ist, wenn er wahr ist. 
(Man kann ihn also verstehen, ohne zu wissen, 
ob er wahr ist.) 
Man versteht ihn, wenn man seine Bestandteile 
versteht. 
4.025 Die Ubersetzung einer Sprache in eine andere 
66 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
imagery of our language, rests on the logic of 
representation. 
4.0I6 In order to understand the essence of the 
proposition, consider hieroglyphic writing, which 
pictures the facts it describes. 
And from. it came the alphabet without the 
essence of the representation being lost. 
4.02 This we see from the fact that we understand 
the sense of the propositional sign, without having 
had it explained to us. 
4.021 The proposition is a picture of reality, for I know 
the state of affairs presented by it, if I understand 
the proposition. And I understand the proposition, 
without its sense having been explained to me. 
4.022 The proposition shows its sense. 
The proposition shows how things stand, if it is 
true. And it says, that they do so stand. 
4.023 The proposition determines reality to this 
extent, that one only needs to say "Yes" or 
"No" to it to make it agree with reality. 
Reality must therefore be completely described by 
the proposition. 
A proposition is the description of a fact. 
As the description of an object describes it by 
its external properties so propositions describe 
reality by its internal properties. 
The proposition constructs a world with the 
help of a logical scaffolding, and therefore one 
can actually see in the proposition all the logical 
features possessed by reality if it is true. One can 
draw conclusions from a false proposition. 
4.024 To understand a proposition means to know 
what is the case, if it is true. 
(One can therefore understand it without 
knowing whether it is true or not.) 
One understands it if one understands its 
constituent parts. 
4.025 The translation of one language into another 
67 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
geht nicht so vor sich, dass man jeden Satz der 
einen in einen Satz der anderen iibersetzt, sondern 
nur die Satzbestandteile werden iibersetzt. 
(U nd das Worterbuch iibersetzt nicht nur 
Substantiva, sondern auch Zeit-, Eigenschafts-und 
Bindeworter etc. ; und es behandelt sie alle gleich.) 
4.026 Die Bedeutungen der einfachen Zeichen (der 
Worter) miissen uns erklart werden, <lass wir sie 
verstehen. 
Mit den Satzen aber verstandigen wir uns. 
4.027 Es liegt im W esen des Satzes, dass er uns einen 
n e u en Sinn mitteilen kann. 
4.03 Ein Satz muss mit alten Ausdriicken einen 
neuen Sinn mitteilen. 
Der Satz teilt uns eine Sachlage mit, also 
muss er we sent 1 i c h mit der Sachlage zusam­
menhangen. 
U nd der Zusammenhang ist eben, dass er ihr 
logisches Bild ist. 
Der Satz sagt nur insoweit etwas aus, als er ein 
Bild ist. 
4.031 Im Satz wird gleichsam eine Sachlage pro-
beweise zusammengestellt. 
Man kann geradezu sagen : statt, dieser Satz 
hat diesen und diesen Sinn ; dieser Satz stellt diese 
und diese Sachlage dar. 
4.0311 Ein Name steht filr ein Ding, ein anderer fiir 
ein anderes Ding und untereinander sind sie 
verbunden, so stellt das Ganze-wie ein lebendes 
Bild-den Sachverhalt vor. 
4.0312 Die Moglichkeit des Satzes beruht auf dem 
Prinzip der Vertretung von Gegenstiinden durch 
Zeichen. 
Mein Grundgedanke ist, <lass die ,,logischen 
Konstanten" nicht vertreten. Dass sich die Logik 
der Tatsachen nicht vertreten lasst. 
4.032 N ur insoweit~ist der Satz ein Bild einer Sachlage, 
als er logisch gegliedert ist. 
68 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
is not a process of translating each proposition 
of the one into a proposition of the other, but 
only the constituent parts of propositions are 
translated. 
( And the dictionary does not only translate 
substantives but also adverbs and conjunctions, 
etc., and it treats them all alike.) 
4.026 The meanings of the simple signs (the words) 
must be explained to us, if we are to understand 
them. 
By means of propositions we explain ourselves. 
4.027 It is essential to propositions, that they can 
communicate a new sense to us. 
4.03 A proposition must communicate a new sense 
with old words. 
The proposition communicates to us a state of 
affairs, therefore it must be essentZ:ally connected 
with the state of affairs. 
And the connexion is, in fact, that it is its 
logical picture. 
The proposition only asserts something, in so 
far as it is a picture. 
4.03I In the proposition a state of affairs is, as it 
were, put together for the sake of experiment. 
One can say, instead of, This proposition has 
such and such a sense, This proposition represents 
such and such a state of affairs. 
4.0311 One name stands for one thing, and another 
for another thing, and they are connected together. 
And so the whole, like a living picture, presents 
the atomic fact. 
4.0312 The possibility of propositions is based upon the 
principle of the representation of objects by signs. 
My fundamental thought is that the '' logical 
constants" do not represent. That the logic of the 
facts cannot be represented. 
4.032 The proposition is a picture of its state of 
affairs, only in so far as it is logically articulated. 
69 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
4.061 
(Auch der Satz ,,ambulo" ist zusammengesetzt, 
denn sein Stamm ergibt mit einer anderen Endung 
und seine Endung mit einem anderen Stamm, einen 
anderen Sinn.) 
Am Satz muss gerade soviet zu unterscheiden 
sein, als an der Sachlage die er darstellt. 
Die beiden mi.issen die gleiche logische (mathe­
matische) Mannigfaltigkeit besitzen. (Vergleiche 
Hertz's Mechanik, i.iber Dynamische Modelle.) 
Diese mathematische Mannigfaltigkeit kann 
man natilrlich nicht selbst wieder abbilden. Aus 
ihr kann man beim Abbilden nicht heraus. 
Wollten wir z. B. das, was wir durch ,,(x) fx" 
ausdri.icken, durch Vorsetzen eines Indexes vor 
,,fx" ausdrticken-etwa so: ,,Alg. fx", es wtirde 
nicht gentigen - wir wtissten nicht, was verall­
gemeinert wurde. W ollten wir es durch einen 
Index ,,a" anzeigen-etwa so: ,,f(xa)"-es wtirde 
auch nicht gentigen - wir wtissten nicht den 
Bereich der Allgemeinheitsbezeichnung. 
W ollten wir es durch Einfiihrung einer Marke 
in die Argumentstellen versuchen - etwa so : 
,,(A, A). F (A, A)''-es wilrde nicht gentigen-wir 
konnten die ldentitat der Variablen nicht feststellen. 
U.s.w. 
Alle diese Bezeichnungsweisen gentigen nicht, 
weil sie nicht die notwendige mathematische 
Mannigfaltigkeit haben. 
Aus demselben Grunde gentigt die idealistische 
Erklarung des Sehens der raumlichen Beziehungen 
durch die ,,Raumbrille" nicht, weil sie nicht die 
Mannigfaltigkeit dieser Beziehungen erklaren kann. 
Die Wirklichkeit wird mit dem Satz verglichen. 
Nur dadurch kann der Satz wahr oder falsch 
sein, indem er ein Bild der Wirklichkeit ist. 
Beachtet man nicht, dass der Satz einen von 
den Tatsachen unabhangigen Sinn hat, so kann 
man leicht glauben, dass wahr und falsch gleich-
70 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
(Even the proposition '' am bulo" is comp~site, 
for its stem gives a different sense with another 
termination, or its termination with anot&er 
stem.) 
4.04 In the proposition there must be exactly as 
many things distinguishable as there are in the 
state of affairs, which it represents. 
They must both possess the same logical 
(mathematical) multiplicity (cf. Hertz's Mechanics, 
on Dynamic Models). 
4.041 This mathematical multiplicity naturally cannot 
in its turn be represented. One cannot get outside 
it in the representation. 
4.0411 If we tried, for example, to express what is 
4.061 
expressed by '' (z) . fz" by putting an index before 
fz, like: "Gen. fz",. it would not do, we should 
not know what was generalized. If we tried to 
show it by an index g, like: "f (zg-)" it would not 
do-we should not know the scope of the general ... 
ization. 
If we were to try it by introducing a mark 
in the argument places, like '' ( G, G) . F ( G, G) ", it 
would not do-we could not determine the identity 
of the variables, etc. 
All these ways of symbolizing are inadequate 
because they have not the necessary mathematical 
multiplicity. 
For the same reason the idealist explanation of 
the seeing of spatial relations through '' spatial 
spectacles" does not do, because it cannot explain 
the multiplicity of these relations. 
Reality is compared with the proposition. 
Propositions can be true or false only by being 
pictures of the reality. 
If one does not observe that propositions h~ve 
a sense independent of the facts, one can easily 
believe that true and false are two relations 
71 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
berechtigte Beziehungen von Zeichen und Bezeich­
netem sind. 
Man konnte dann z. B. sagen, dass ,,p'' auf die 
wahre Art bezeichnet, was ,, - p" auf die falsche 
Art, etc. 
4.062 Kann man sich nicht mit falschen Satzen, wie 
bisher mit wahren, verstandigen? Solange man 
nur weiss, <lass sie falsch gemeint sind. Nein ! 
Denn, wahr ist ein Satz, wenn es sich so verhalt, 
wie wir es <lurch ihn sagen ; und wenn wir mit 
,,p" - p meinen, und es sich so verhalt wie wir es 
meinen, so ist ,,p" in der neuen Auffassung wahr 
und nicht falsch. 
4.0621 Dass aber die Zeichen ,,p" und ,, - p" das gleiche 
sagen k t, n n en, ist wichtig. Denn es zeigt, <lass 
dem Zeichen ,, - " in der Wirklichkeit nichts 
en tspricht. 
Dass in einem Satz die Verneinung vorkommt, 
ist noch kein Merkmal seines Sinnes ( - - p = p). 
Die Satze ,,p" und ,, - p" haben entgegen­
gesetzten Sinn, aber es entspricht ihnen eine und 
dieselbe Wirklichkeit. 
4.063 Ein Bild zur Erklarung des Wahrheitsbegriffes: 
Schwarzer Fleck auf weissem Papier; die Form 
des Fleckes kann man beschreiben, indem man 
fiir jeden Punkt der Flache angibt, ob er weiss 
oder schwarz ist. Der Tatsache, <lass ein Punkt 
schwarz ist, entspricht eine positive - der, dass 
ein Punkt weiss (nicht schwarz) ist, eine negative 
Tatsache. Bezeich ne ich einen Punkt der Flache 
( einen Frege'schen W ahrheitswert), so entspricht 
dies der Annahme, die zur Beurteilung aufgestellt 
wird, etc. etc. 
Um aber sagen zu konnen, ein Punkt sei 
schwarz oder weiss, muss ich vorerst wissen, 
wann man emen Punkt schwarz und wann 
man ihn weiss nennt; um sagen zu konnen: 
,,p" ist wahr (oder falsch), muss ich bestimmt 
72 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
between signs and things signified with equal 
rights. 
One could then, for exam pie, say that '' p " 
signifies in the true way what '' ,,,,, p " signifies in 
the false way, etc. 
4.062 Can we not make ourselves understood by 
means of false propositions as hitherto with true 
ones, so long as we know that they are meant to 
be false? No ! For a proposition is true, if 
what we assert by means of it is the case ; and if 
by "P" we mean ,,,,, p, and what we mean is the 
case, then '' p " in the new conception is true 
and not false. 
4.0621 That, however, the signs "p " and " ,,,,, p" can 
say the same thing is important, for it shows 
that the sign " ,.,, " corresponds to nothing in 
reality. 
That negation occurs in a proposition, is no 
characteristic of its sense (,,,,, ,,,,, P=P)· 
The propositions "p" and " ,,,,, p " have op­
posite senses, but to them corresponds one and 
the same reality. 
4.063 An illustration to explain the concept of truth. 
A black spot on white paper; the form of the spot 
can be described by saying of each point of the 
plane whether it is white or black. To the fact 
that a point is black corresponds a positive fact; 
to the fact that a point is white (not black), a 
negative fact. If I indicate a point of the plane 
(a truth-value in Frege's terminology), this corre­
sponds to the assumption proposed for judgment, 
etc. etc. 
But to be able to say that a point is black or 
white, I must first know under what conditions a 
point is called white or black ; in order to be able 
to say "P" is true (or false) I must have deter­
mined under what conditions I call "p" true, 
73 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
haben, unter welchen U mstanden ich ,,p" wahr 
nenne, und damit bestimme ich den Sinn des 
Satzes. 
Der Punkt an dem das Gleichnis hinkt ist 
nun der: Wir konnen auf einen Punkt des Papiers 
zeigen, auch ohne zu wissen, was weiss,. u!1d 
schwarz ist; einem Satz ohne Sinn aber entspricht 
gar nichts, denn er bezeichnet kein Ding (Wahr­
heitswert) <lessen Eigenschaften etwa ,,falsch'' od~r 
,,wahr" hiessen ; das Verbum eines Satzes ist nicht 
,,ist wahr" oder ,,ist falsch"-wie Frege glaubte-, 
sondern das, was ,,wahr ist" muss das Verbum, 
schon enthalten. 
4.064 Jeder Satz muss s c ho n einen Sinn haben; 
die Bejahung kann ihn ihm nicht geben, denn 
sie bejaht ja gerade den Sinn. U nd dasselbe gilt 
von der Verneinung, etc. 
4.064r Man konnte sagen: Die Verneinung bezieht 
sich schon auf den logischen Ort, den der verneinte 
Satz besti mm t. 
Der verneinende Satz bestimmt einen and ere n 
logischen Ort als der verneinte. 
Der verneinende Satz bestimmt einen logischen 
Ort mit Hilfe des logischen Ortes des verneinten 
Satzes, indem er jenen ausserhalb diesem liegend 
beschrei bt. 
Dass man den verneinten Satz wieder verneinen 
kann, zeigt schon, dass das, was verneint wird, 
schon ein Satz und nicht erst die Vorbereitung 
zu einem Satze ist. 
4.1 Der Satz stellt das Bestehen und Nichtbestehen 
der Sach verhalte dar. 
4. 11 Die Gesamtheit der wahren Satze ist die 
gesamte Naturwissenschaft (oder die Gesamtheit 
der N aturwissenschaften ). 
4.111 Die Philosophie ist keine der Naturwissen-
schaften. 
(Das Wort ,,Philosophie" muss etwas bedeuten, 
· 74 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
and thereby I determine the sense of the pro­
position. 
The point at which the simile breaks down is 
this: we can indicate a point on the paper, without 
knowing what white and black are ; but to a pro­
position without a sense corresponds nothing at 
all, for it signifies no thing (truth-value) whose 
properties are· called " false " or " true " ; the verb 
of the proposition is not '' is true " or.'' is false"­
as Frege thought-but that which '' is true'' must 
already contain the verb. 
4.064 Every propos1t1on must already have a sense; 
assertion cannot give it a sense, for what it asserts 
is the sense itself. And the same holds of 
denial, etc. 
4.0641 One could say, the denial is already related to 
the logical place determined by the proposition 
that is denied. 
The denying proposition determines a logical 
place other than does the proposition denied. 
The denying proposition determines a logical 
place, with the help of the logical place of the 
proposition denied, by saying that it lies outside 
the latter place. 
That one can deny again the denied proposition, 
shows that what is denied is already a pro­
position and not merely the preliminary to a 
proposition. 
4.1 A proposition presents the existence and non-
existence of atomic facts. 
4.11 The totality of true propositions is the total 
natural science (or the totality of the natural 
sciences). 
4. III Philosophy 1s not one of the natural 
sciences. 
(The word '' philosophy" must mean something 
75 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
was iiber oder unter, aber nicht neben den Natur­
wissenschaften steht.) 
4.112 Der Zweck der Philosophie ist die Iogische 
Kia.rung der Gedanken. 
Die Philosophie ist keine Lehre, sondern eine 
Tatigkeit. 
Ein philosophisches Werk besteht wesentlich 
aus Erlauterungen. 
Das Resultat der Philosophie sind nicht ,,philo­
sophische Satze", sondern das Klarwerden von 
Satzen. 
Die Philosophie soII die Gedanken, die sonst, 
gleichsam, trtibe und verschwommen sind, klar 
machen und scharf abgrenzen. 
4. 1121 Die Psychologie ist der Philosophie nicht ver-
wandter als irgend eine andere Naturwissen­
schaft. 
Erkenntnistheorie ist die Philosophie der 
Psychologie. 
Entspricht nicht mein Studium der Zeichen­
sprache dem Studium der Denkprozesse, welches 
die Philosophen fiir die Philosophie der Logik fiir 
so wesentlich hielten? Nur verwickelten sie sich 
meistens in unwesentliche psychologische U nter­
suchungen und eine analoge Gefahr gibt es auch 
bei meiner Methode. 
4. 1r22 Die Darwinsche Theorie hat mit der Philosophie 
nicht mehr zu schaffen, als irgend eine andere 
H ypothese der N aturwissenschaft. 
4. 113 Die Philosophie begrenzt das bestreitbare 
Gebiet der N aturwissenschaft. 
4.114 Sie soII das Denkbare abgrenzen und damit das 
U ndenkbare. 
Sie soll das U ndenkbare von innen <lurch das 
Denkbare begrenzen. 
4. 115 Sie wird das U nsagbare bedeuten, indem sie 
das Sagbare klar darstellt. 
4.116 Alles was iiberhaupt gedacht werden kann, 
76 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
which stands above or below, but not beside the 
natural sciences.) 
4.112 The object of philosophy is the logical clarifica-
tion of thoughts. 
Philosophy is not a theory but an activity. 
A philosophical work consists essentially of 
elucidations. 
The result of philosophy is not a number of 
'' philosophical propositions ", but to make proposi­
tions clear. 
Philosophy should make clear and delimit 
sharply the thoughts which otherwise are, as it 
were, opaque and blurred. 
4.1121 Psychology is no nearer related to philosophy, 
than is any other natural science. 
The theory of knowledge is the philosophy of 
psychology. 
Does not my study of sign-language correspond 
to the study of thought processes which philosophers 
held to be so essential to the philosophy of logic? 
Only they got entangled for the most part in un­
essential psychological investigations, and there 
is an analogous danger for my method. 
4.1122 The Darwinian theory has no more to do with 
philosophy than has any other hypothesis of natural 
science. 
4. 113 Philosophy limits the disputable sphere of natural 
science. 
4.114 It should limit the thinkable and thereby the 
unthinkable. 
It should limit the unthinkable from within 
through the thinkable. 
4.115 It will mean the unspeakable by clearly dis-
playing the speakable. 
4.116 Everything that can be thought at all can be 
77 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
kann klar gedacht werden. Alles was sich aus­
sprechen lasst, lasst sich klar aussprechen. 
4.12 Der Satz kann die gesamte Wirklichkeit dar-
stellen, aber er kann nicht das darstellen, was er 
mit der Wirklichkeit gemein haben muss, um sie 
darstellen zu konnen-die logische Form. 
Um die logische Form darstellen zu konnen, 
miissten wir uns mit dem Satze ausserhalb der 
Logik aufstellen konnen, das heisst ausserhalb der 
Welt. 
4. I2I Der Satz kann die logische Form nicht darstellen, 
sie spiegelt sich in ihm. 
Was sich in der Sprache spiegelt, kann sie 
nicht darstellen. 
Was s i c h in der Sprache ausdrilckt, konnen 
w i r nicht <lurch sie ausdri.icken. 
Der Satz z e i g t die logische Form der Wirk­
lichkeit. 
Er weist sie auf. 
4. I2II So zeigt ein Satz ,,fa", <lass in seinem Sinn der 
Gegenstand a vorkommt, zwei Satze ,,fa" und ,,ga'', 
dass in ihnen beiden von demsel ben Gegenstand 
die Rede ist. 
W enn zwei Satze einander widersprechen, so 
zeigt dies ihre Struktur ; ebenso, wenn einer aus 
dem anderen folgt. U. s. w. 
4. 1212 Was gezeigt werden k a n n, k an n nicht gesagt 
werden. 
4. I213 J etzt verstehen wir auch unser Geftihl : class wir 
im Besitze einer richtigen logischen Auffassung 
seien, wenn nur einmal alles in unserer Zeichen­
sprache stimmt. 
4. I22 Wir konnen in gewissem Sinne van formalen 
Eigenschaften der Gegenstande und Sachverhalte 
bezw. van Eigenschaften der Struktur der Tat­
sachen reden und in demselben Sinne van formalen 
Relationen und Relationen von Strukturen. 
(Statt Eigenschaft der Struktur sage ich auch 
78 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
thought clearly. Everything that can be said can 
be said clearly. 
4.12 Propositions can represent the whole reality, 
but they cannot represent what they must have in 
common with reality in order to be able to repre­
sent it-the logical form. 
To be able to represent the logical form, we 
should have to be able to put ourselves with the 
propositions outside logic, that is outside the 
world. 
4. 121 Propositions cannot represent the logical form : 
this mirrors itself in the propositions. 
That which mirrors itself in language, language 
cannot represent. 
That which expresses itself in language, we· 
cannot express by language. 
The propositions show the logical form of reality. 
They exhibit it. 
4.1211 Thus a proposition "fa" shows that in its sense 
the object a occurs, two propositions "fa" and 
'' ga" that they are both about the same object. 
If two propositions contradict one another, this 
is shown by their structure ; similarly if one follows 
from another, etc. 
4.1212 What can be shown cannot be said. 
4.1213 Now we understand our feeling that we are in 
possession of the right logical conception, if only 
all is right in our symbolism. 
4. 122 We can speak in a certain sense of formal 
properties of objects and atomic facts, or of pro­
perties of the structure of facts, and in the same 
sense of formal relations and relations of 
structures. 
(Instead of property of the structure I also say 
79 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
,,interne Eigenschaft" ; statt Relation der Struk­
turen ,,interne Relation''. 
Ich fiihre diese Ausdriicke ein, um den Grund 
der, bei den Philosophen sehr verbreiteten Ver­
wechsl ung zwischen den internen Relationen und 
den eigen tlichen ( externen) Relation en zu zeigen.) 
Das Bestehen solcher interner Eigenschaften 
und Relationen kann aber nicht <lurch Satze 
behauptet werden, sondern es zeigt sich in den 
Satzen, welche jene Sachverhalte darstellen und 
von jenen Gegenstanden handeln. 
4.1221 Eine interne Eigenschaft einer Tatsache konnen 
wir auch einen Zug dieser Tatsache nennen. (In 
dem Sinn, in welchem wir etwa von Gesichtszi.igen 
sprechen.) 
4.123 Eine Eigenschaft ist intern, wenn es undenkbar 
ist, <lass ihr Gegenstand sie nicht besitzt. 
(Diese blaue Farbe und jene stehen in der 
internen Relation von heller und dunkler eo ipso. 
Es ist undenkbar, <lass dies e beiden Gegenstande 
nicht in dieser Relation stilnden.) 
(Hier entspricht dem schwankenden Gebrauch 
der W orte ,,Eigenschaft" und ,,Relation" der 
schwankende Gebrauch des Wortes ,,Gegenstand".) 
4. 124 Das Bestehen einer intern en Eigenschaft einer 
moglichen Sachlage wird nicht <lurch einen Satz 
ausgedrilckt, sondern es dri.ickt sich in dem sie 
darstellenden Satz, durch eine interne Eigenschaft 
dieses Satzes aus. 
Es ware ebenso unsinnig, dem Satze eme 
formate Eigenschaft zuzusprechen, als sie ihm 
abzusprechen. 
4.1241 Formen kann man nicht dadurch von einander 
unterscheiden, <lass man sagt, die eine habe diese, 
die andere aber jene Eigenschaft; denn dies setzt 
voraus, <lass es einen Sinn babe, beide Eigen­
schaften von beiden F ormen auszusagen. 
4.125 Das Bestehen einer internen Relation zwischen 
Bo 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
"internal property"; instead of relation of struc­
tures "internal relation ". 
I introduce these expressions in order to show 
the reason for the confusion, very widespread 
among philosophers, between internal relations 
and proper ( external) relations.) 
The holding of such internal properties and rela­
tions cannot, however, be asserted by propositions, 
but it shows itself in the propositions, which 
present the facts and treat of the objects in question. 
4. 1221 An internal property of a fact we also call a 
feature of this fact. (In the sense in which we 
speak of facial features.) 
4.123 A property is internal if it is unthinkable that 
its object does not possess it. 
(This blue colour and that stand in the internal 
relation of brighter and darker eo ipso. It is 
unthinkable that these two objects should not stand 
in this relation.) 
(Hereto the shifting use of the words '' property" 
and '' relation " there corresponds the shifting use 
of the word ''object".) 
4.124 The existence of an internal property of a possible 
state of affairs is not expressed by a proposition, 
but it expresses itself in the proposition which 
presents that state of affairs, by an internal property 
of this proposition. 
It would be as senseless to ascribe a formal 
property to a proposition as to deny it the formal 
property. 
4.1241 One cannot distinguish forms from one another 
by saying that one has this property, the other 
that : for this assumes that there is a sense in assert­
ing either property of either form. 
4. 125 The existence of an internal relation between 
81 F 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
moglichen Sachlagen driickt sich sprachlich <lurch 
eine interne Relation zwischen den sie darstellenden 
Satzen aus. 
4.1251 Hier erledigt sich nun die Streitfrage ,,ob alle 
Relationen intern oder extern" seien. 
4. 1252 Reihen, welche <lurch intern e Relationen 
geordnet sind, nenne ich Formenreihen. 
Die Zahlenreihe ist nicht nach einer externen, 
sondern nach einer internen Relation geordnet. 
Ebenso die Reihe der Satze ,,aRb", 
,,(3x): aRx. xRb", 
,,(3x,y): a Rx. xRy. y Rb", u. s. f. 
(Steht b in einer dieser Beziehungen zu a, so 
nenne ich b einen N achfolger von a.) 
4. 126 In dem Sinne, in we le hem wir von formal en 
Eigenschaften sprechen, konnen wir nun auch 
von formalen Begriffen reden. 
(Ich filhre diesen Ausdruck ein, um den Grund 
der Verwechslung der formalen Begriffe mit den 
eigentlichen Begriffen, welche die ganze alte Logik 
durchzieht, klar zu machen.) 
Dass etwas unter einen formalen Begriff als 
<lessen Gegenstand fiillt, kann nicht <lurch einen 
Satz ausgedriickt werden. Sondern es zeigt sich 
an dem Zeichen dieses Gegenstandes selbst. (Der 
Name zeigt, dass er einen Gegenstand bezeichnet, 
das Zahlenzeichen, dass es eine Zahl bezeichnet etc.) 
Die formalen Begriffe konnen ja nicht, wie 
die eigentlichen Begriffe, <lurch eine Funktion 
dargestellt werden. 
Denn ihre Merkmale, die formalen Eigenschaf­
ten, werden nicht <lurch Funktionen ausgedriickt. 
Der Ausdruck der formalen Eigenschaft ist ein 
Zug gewisser Symbole. 
Das Zeichen der Merkmale eines formalen 
Begriffes ist also ein charakteristischer Zug aller 
Symbole, deren Bedeutungen unter den Begriff 
fallen. 
82 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
possible states of affairs expresses itself in language 
by an internal relation between the propositions 
presenting them. 
4. 1251 Now this settles the disputed question "whether 
all relations are internal or external". 
4.1252 Series which are ordered by -internal relations I 
call formal series. 
The series of n um hers is ordered not by an 
external, but by an internal relation. 
Similarly the series of proposWons '' aRb ", 
'' (3:z) : aRz. zRb ", 
" (Hx,y) : aRx. xRy .yRb", etc. 
( If b stands in one of these relations to a, I call 
b a successor of a.) 
4.126 In the sense in which we speak of formal 
properties we can now speak also of formal 
concepts. 
(I introduce this expression in order to make 
clear the confusion of formal concepts with proper 
concepts which runs through the whole of the old 
logic.) 
That anything falls under a formal concept as 
an object belonging to it, cannot be expressed by 
a propos1t10n. But it is shown in the symbol for 
the object itself. (The name shows that it signifies 
an object, the numerical sign that it signifies a 
number, etc.) 
Formal concepts cannot, like proper concepts, 
be presented by a function. 
For their characteristics, the formal properties, 
are not expressed by the functions. 
The expression of a formal property is a feature 
of certain symbols. 
The sign that signifies the characteristics .of a 
formal concept is, therefore, a characteristic feature 
of all symbols, whose meanings fall under the 
concept. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
Der Ausdruck des formalen Begriffes also, eine 
Satzvariable, in welcher n ur dieser charakteristische 
Zug konstant ist. 
4. 127 Die Satzvariable bezeichnet den formalen 
Begriff und ihre Werte die Gegenstande, welche 
unter diesen Begriff fallen. 
4. 1271 J ede Variable ist das Zeichen ei nes formalen 
Begriffes. 
Denn jede Variable stellt eine konstante Form 
dar, welche alle ihre Werte besitzen, und die als 
formate Eigenschaft dieser \Verte aufgefasst werden 
kann. 
4.1272 So ist der variable Name ,,x" das eigentliche 
Zeichen des Scheinbegriffes Ge gen stand. 
Wo immer das Wort ,,Gegenstand" (,,Ding", 
,,Sache", etc.) richtig gebraucht wird, wird es in 
der Begriffsschrift <lurch den variablen Namen 
ausgedrtickt. 
Zurn Beispiel in dem Satz ,,es gibt 2 Gegen­
stande, welche ... " <lurch ,,(3x,y) ... ". 
Wo immer es anders, also als eigentliches 
Begriffswort gebraucht wird, entstehen unsinnige 
Scheinsatze. 
So kann man z. B. nicht sagen ,,Es gibt Gegen­
stande", wie man etwa sagt ,,Es gibt Bucher''. 
U nd ebenso wenig ,,Es gibt 100 Gegenstande", 
oder ,,Es gibt ~0 Gegenstande". 
U nd es ist unsinnig, von der An z ah 1 a 11 er 
G e g e n s t a n d e zu s p rechen. 
Dassel be gilt von den W orten ,, Korn plex ", 
,,Tatsache", ,,Funktion", ,,Zahl", etc. 
Sie alle bezeichnen formate Begriffe und werden 
in der Begriffsschrift <lurch Variable, nicht <lurch 
Funktionen oder Klassen dargestellt. (Wie Frege 
und Russell glaubten.) 
Ausdrticke wie ,,1 ist eine Zahl", ,,es gibt nur 
Eine Null'' und alle ahnlichen sind unsinnig. 
(Es ist ebenso unsinnig zu sagen ,,es gibt nur 
84 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
The expression of the formal concept is there 
fore a propositional variable in which only this 
characteristic feature is constant. 
4.I27 The propositional variable signifies the formal 
concept, and its values signify the objects which 
fal 1 under this concept. 
4. I27I Every variable is the sign of a formal 
concept. 
For every variable presents a constant form, 
which all its values possess, and which can 
be conceived as a formal property of these 
values. 
4.1272 So the variable name "z" is the proper sign of 
the pseudo-concept obfect. 
Wherever the word" object" ("thing", "entity", 
etc.) is rightly used, it is expressed in logical 
symbolism by the variable name. 
For example in the proposition "there are two 
b. h" h " b " ( ) " o ~ects w 1c . . . , y 3:z,y . • • . 
Wherever it is used otherwise, i.e. as a proper 
concept word, there anse senseless pseudo­
proposi tions. 
So one cannot, e.g. say "There are objects'' 
as one says " There are books ". Nor " There 
are IOO objects" or '' There are tt0 objects". 
And it is senseless to speak of the number of all 
obfects. 
The same holds of the words '' Complex ", 
"Fact", "Function", "Number", etc. 
They all signify formal concepts and are 
presented in logical symbolism by variables, not 
by functions or classes (as Frege and Russell 
thought). 
Expressions like " I is a n um her ", " there is 
only one number nought", and all like them are 
senseless. 
(It is as senseless to say, '' there is only one I " 
85 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
eine I", als es unsinnig ware, zu sagen : 2 + 2 ist 
um 3 Uhr gleich 4.) 
4.12721 Der formate Begriff ist mit einem Gegenstand, 
der unter ihn fiillt, bereits gegeben. Man kann 
also nicht Gegenstande eines formalen Begriffes 
u n d den formalen Begriff selbst als Grundbegriffe 
einfilhren. Man kann also z. B. nicht den Begriff 
der Funktion, und auch spezielle Funktionen (wie 
Russell) als Grundbegriffe einfilhren ; oder den 
Begriff der Zahl und bestimmte Zahlen. 
4.1273 Wollen wir den allgemeinen Satz: ,, b ist ein 
Nachfolger von a" in der Begriffsschrift aus­
driicken, so brauchen wir hierzu einen Ausdruck 
filr das allgemeine Glied der Formenreihe: aRb, 
(ax): aRx. xRb, (3:x,y): aRx. xRy. y Rb, .•. Das 
allgemeine Glied einer Formenreihe kann man nur 
<lurch eine Variable ausdrilcken, denn der Begriff: 
Glied dieser Formenreihe, ist ein form a 1 er 
Begriff. (Dies haben Frege und Russell iiber­
sehen ; die Art und Weise wie sie allgemeine 
Satze, wie den obigen ausdriicken wollen ist daher 
falsch; sie enthalt einen circulus vitiosus.) 
Wir konnen das allgemeine Glied der Formen­
reihe bestimmen, indem wir ihr erstes Glied 
angeben und die allgemeine Form der Operation, 
welche das folgende Glied aus dem vorh'ergehenden 
Satz erzeugt. 
4.1274 Die Frage nach der Existenz eines formalen 
Begriffes ist unsinnig. Denn kein Satz kann eine 
solche Frage beantworten. 
(Man kann also z. B. nicht fragen : ,, Gibt es 
unanalysierbare Subjekt-Pradikatsatze? ") 
4.128 Die logischen Formen sind zahl I o s. 
Darum gibt es in der Logik keine ausgezeich­
neten Zahlen und darum gibt es keinen philoso­
phischen Monismus oder Dualismus, etc. 
4.2 Der Sinn des Satzes ist seine Ubereinstim-
mung, und Nichtilbereinstimmung mit den Mog-
86 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
as it would be to say: 2 + 2 is at 3 o'clock equal 
to 4.) 
4. 12721 The formal concept is already given with an 
object, which falls under it. One cannot, there­
fore, introduce both, the objects which fall under 
a formal concept and the formal concept itself, 
as primitive ideas. One cannot, therefore, e.g. 
introduce (as Russell does) the concept of function 
and also special functions as primitive ideas ; or 
the concept of number and definite numbers. 
4.1273 If we want to express in logical symbolism 
the general proposition '' b is a successor of a " 
we need for this an expression for the general 
term of the formal series : aRb, (3x) : aRx. xRb, 
(3:x,y) : aRx. xRy. yRb, . . . The general term of 
a formal series can only be expressed by a 
variable, for the concept symbolized by "term of 
this formal series" is a formal concept. (This 
Frege and Russell overlooked ; the way in 
which they express general propositions like the 
above is, therefore, false; it contains a v1c1ous 
circle.) 
We can determine the general term of the 
formal series by giving its first term and the 
general form of the operation, which generates 
the following term out of the preceding pro­
position. 
4.1274 The question about the existence of a formal 
concept is senseless. For no proposition can 
answer such a question. 
(For example, one cannot ask: "Are there 
unanalysable subject-predicate propositions?") 
4. 128 The logical forms are anumerical. 
Therefore there are in logic no pre-eminent 
numbers, and therefore there is no philosophical 
monism or dualism, etc. 
4.2 The sense of a proposition is its agreement 
and disagreement with the possibilities of the 
87 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
lichkeiten des Bestehens und Nichtbestehens der 
Sachverhalte. 
4.21 Der einfachste Satz, der Elementarsatz, be-
hauptet das Bestehen eines Sachverhaltes. 
4.2II Ein Zeichen des Elementarsatzes ist es, dass 
kein Elementarsatz mit ihm in Widerspruch stehen 
kann. 
4.22 Der Elementarsatz besteht aus Namen. Er ist 
ein Zusammenhang, eine Verkettung, von Namen. 
4.221 Es ist offenbar, dass wir bei der Analyse der 
Satze auf Elementarsatze kommen milssen, die aus 
Namen in unmittelbarer Verbindung bestehen. 
Es fragt sich hier, wie kommt der Satzverband 
zustande. 
4.22II Auch wenn die Welt unendlich komplex ist, 
so dass jede Tatsache aus unend lich vielen Sach­
verhal ten besteht und jeder Sachverhalt aus un­
endlich vielen Gegenstanden zusammengesetzt ist, 
auch dann miisste es Gegenstande und Sachver­
halte geben. 
4.23 Der Name kommt im Satz nur im Zusammen-
hange des Elementarsatzes vor. 
4.24 Die Namen sind die einfachen Symbole, ich 
deute sie durcheinzelne Buchstaben (,,x", ,,y", ,,z") 
an. 
Den Elementarsatz schreibe ich als Funktion 
der Namen in der Form: ,,fx", ,,</>(x,y,)", etc. 
Oder ich deute ihn durch die Buchstaben p, q, 
ran. 
4. 241 Gebrauche ich zwei Zeichen in ein und der-
selben Bedeutung, so drilcke ich dies aus, indem 
ich zwischen beide das Zeichen , , = '' setze. 
,,a= b" heisst also : das Zeichen , ,a" ist durch 
das Zeichen ,, b" ersetzbar. 
(Fiihre ich <lurch eine Gleichung ein neues 
Zeichen ,, b" ein, indem ich bestimme, es sol le ein 
bereits bekanntes Z~ichen ,,a" ersetzen, so schreibe 
ich die Gleichung-Definition---(wie Russell) in 
88 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
existence and non-existence of the atomic 
facts. 
4. 2r The simplest proposition, the elementary pro-
position, asserts the existence of an atomic fact. 
4.21r It is a sign of an elementary proposi-
tion, that no elementary proposition can contra­
dict it. 
4.22 The elementary proposition consists of names. 
It is a connexion, a concatenation, of names. 
4.221 It is obvious that in the analysis of propositions 
we must come to elementary propositions, which 
consist of names in immediate corn bi nation. 
The question arises here, how the propositional 
connexion comes to be. 
4.2211 Even if the world is infinitely complex, so 
that every fact consists of an infinite number 
of atomic facts and every atomic fact is composed 
of an infinite number of objects, even then there 
must be objects and atomic facts. 
4.23 The name occurs in the proposition only in 
the context of the elementary proposition. 
4.24 The names are the simple symbols, I indicate 
them by single letters (z,y,z). 
The elementary proposition I write as function 
of the names, in the form ''f~", "c/,(x,y) ", etc. 
Or I indicate it by the letters p,q,r. 
4.24r If I use two signs with one and the same 
meaning, I express this by putting between them 
the sign '' = ". 
'' a= b" means then, that the sign "a" is 
replaceable by the sign '' b ". 
(If I introduce by an equation a new sign "b ", 
by determining that it shall replace a previously 
known sign "a", I write the equation-definition 
89 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
der Form ,,a= b Def. ". Die Definition ist eine 
Zeichenregel.) 
4.242 Ausdriicke von der Form ,,a= b" sind also nur 
Behelfe der Darstellung ; sie sagen nichts iiber die 
Bedeutung der Zeichen ,,a", ,, b" aus. 
4.243 Konnen wir zwei Namen verstehen, ohne zu 
wissen, ob sie dasselbe Ding oder zwei verschie­
dene Dinge bezeichnen ?-Konnen wir einen Satz, 
worin zwei Namen vorkommen, verstehen, ohne 
zu wissen, ob sie Dasselbe oder Verschiedenes 
bedeuten? 
Kenne ich etwa die Bedeutung eines englischen 
und eines gleichbedeutenden deutschen Wortes, so 
ist es unmoglich, dass ich nicht weiss, dass die 
beiden gleichbedeutend sind ; es ist unmoglich, 
dass ich sie nicht ineinander iibersetzen kann. 
Ausdrticke wie ,,a= a", oder von diesen abge­
leitete, sind weder Elementarsatze, noch sonst sinn­
volle Zeichen. (Dies wird sich spater zeigen.) 
4.25 1st der Elementarsatz wahr, so besteht der 
Sachverhalt ; ist der Elementarsatz falsch, so be­
steht der Sachverhalt nicht. 
4.26 Die Angabe aller wahren, Elementarsatze be-
schreibt die Welt vollstandig. Die Welt ist 
vollstandig beschrieben <lurch die Angaben aller 
Elementarsatze plus der AngaQe, welche von ihnen 
wahr und welche falsch sind. 
4.27 Bezi.iglich des Bestehens und Nichtbestehens von 
n Sachverhalten gibt es K 0 = .!
0
(~) MOglichkeiten. 
Es konnen alle Korn binationen der Sachverhalte 
bestehen, die andern nicht bestehen. 
4.28 Diesen Kombinationen entsprechen ebenso viele 
Moglichkeiten der Wahrheit-und Falschheit-von 
n Elementarsatzen. 
4.3 Die Wahrheitsmoglichkeiten der Elementarsatze 
bedeuten die Moglichkeiten des Bestehens und 
Nichtbestehens der Sachverhalte. 
90 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
-(like Russell) in the form "a= b Def. ". A 
definition is a symbolic rule.) 
4. 242 Expressions of the form ''a= b" are therefore only 
expedients in presentation : They assert nothing 
about the meaning of the signs ''a,, and '' b ". 
4.243 Can we understand two names without know-
ing whether they signify the same thing or two 
different things? Can we understand a proposition 
in which two names occur, without knowing if they 
mean the same or different things? 
If I know the meaning of an English and a 
synonymous German word, it is impossible for 
me not to know that they are synonymous, it is 
impossible for me not to be able to translate them 
into one another. 
Expressions like '' a= a ", or expressions 
deduced from these are neither elementary pro­
positions nor otherwise significant signs. (This 
will be shown later.) 
4.25 If the elementary proposition is true, the atomic 
fact exists ; if it is false the atomic fact does not 
exist. 
4.26 The specification of all true elementary pro-
positions describes the world completely. The 
world is completely described by the specification 
of all elementary propositions plus the specification, 
which of them are true and which false. 
4.27 With regard to the existence of n atomic facts 
there are Kn= f (n) possibilities. 
'II=<> ., 
It is possible for all combinations of atomic 
facts to exist, and the others not to exist. 
4.28 To these combinations correspond the same 
number of possibilities of the truth-and falsehood 
-of n elementary propositions. 
4.3 The truth-possibilities of the elementary pro-
positions mean the possibilities of the existence 
and non-existence of the atomic facts. 
9I 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
4.31 Die Wahrheitsmoglichkeiten konnen wir <lurch 
Schemata folgender Art darstellen (,,W" bedeutet 
,,wahr", ,,F", ,,falsch". Die Rei hen der ,,W" und 
,,F" unter der Reihe der Elementarsatze bedeuten 
in leichtverstandlicher Symbolik deren Wahrheits­
moglichkeiten) : 
p q r p q p 
------ --w w w w w w --
F w w F w F --
w F w w F --
w w F F F -- - --
F F w 
F w F 
w F F 
F F F 
4.4 Der Satz ist der Ausdruck der Ubereinstimmung 
und N ichtii bereinstimm ung rnit den W ahrheits­
moglichkeiten der Elementarsatze. 
4.41 Die Wahrheitsmoglichkeiten der Elementarsatze 
sind die Bedingungen der Wahrheit und Falschheit 
der Satze. 
4.411 Es ist von vornherein wahrscheinlich, dass die 
Einfiihrung der Elementarsatze fiir das Verstandnis 
all er anderen Satzarten grundlegend ist. Ja, das 
Verstandnis der allgemeinen Satze hangt f ii h 1 bar 
von dem der Elementarsatze ab. 
4.42 Beziiglich der Ubereinstimmung und Nichtiiber-
einstimmung eines Satzes mit den Wahrheits­
moglichkeiten von n Elementarsatzen gibt es 
}
0
(~• )= L 0 MOglichkeiten. 
4.43 Die Ubereinstimmung mit den Wahrheitsmo-
92 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
4.31 The truth-possibilities can be presented by 
schemata of the following kind ('' T " means 
'' true ", '' F " '' false ". The rows of T's and F's 
under the row of the elementary propositions mean 
their truth-possibilities in an easily intelligible 
symbolism). 
p q r p q p 
--
T T T T T T 
F T T F T F 
T F T T F 
--1--
T T F F F ------
F F T 
--
F T F - ----
T F F 
F F F 
4.4 A proposition is the expression of agreement 
and disagreement with the truth-possibilities of 
the elementary propositions. 
4.41 The truth-possibilities of the elementary pro-
positions are the conditions of the truth and 
falsehood of the propositions. 
4.411 It seems probable even at first sight that the 
introduction of the elementary propositions is 
fundamental for the comprehension of the other 
kinds of propositions. Indeed the comprehension 
of the general propositions depends palpably on 
that of the elementary propositions. 
4.42 With regard to the _ agreement and dis-
agreement of a proposition with the truth­
possibilities of n elementary propositions there 
Kn K, · 
are }3,.( /) = L,. possibilities. 
4.43 Agreement with the truth-possibilities can be 
93 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
glichkeiten konnen wir dadurch ausdrticken, indem 
wir ihnen im Schema etwa das Abzeichen ,,W" 
(wahr) zuordnen. 
Das Fehlen dieses Abzeichens bedeutet die 
Nichtii bereinstimm ung. 
4.431 Der Ausdruck der Ubereinstimmung und Nicht-
iibereinstimmung mit den Wahrheitsmoglichkeiten 
der Elementarsatze driickt die W ahrheitsbedin­
gungen des Satzes aus. 
Der Satz ist der Ausdruck seiner W ahrheits­
bedingungen. 
(Frege hat sie daher ganz richtig als Erklarung 
der Zeichen seiner Begriffsschrift vorausgeschickt. 
N ur ist die Erklarung des Wahrheitsbegriffes bei 
Frege falsch: Waren ,,das Wahre" und ,,das Falsche" 
wirklich Gegenstande und die Argumente in ,., p 
etc. dann ware nach Frege's Bestimmung der Sinn 
von ,, ,., p" keineswegs bestimmt.) 
4.44 Das Zeichen, welches durch die Zuordnung 
jener Abzeichen ,, W" und der W ahrheitsmoglich­
keiten entsteht, ist ein Satzzeichen. 
4.441 Es ist klar, class dem Komplex der Zeichen 
,,F" und ,,W" kein Gegenstand (oder Komplex von 
Gegenstanden) entspricht; so wenig, wie den hori­
zontalen und vertikalen Strichen oder den Klam­
mern.-,,Logische Gegenstande" gibt es nicht. 
Analoges gilt nati.irlich fiir al]e Zeichen, die das­
selbe ausdriicken wie die Schemata der ,,W" und ,,F". 
4.442 Es ist z. B.: 
p q ' 
-w w w 
F w w - ----w F 
,, F F w 
ein Satzzeichen. 
(Frege's ,,U rteilstrich" ,,I-" ist logisch ganz 
94 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
expressed by co-ordinating with them in the 
schema the mark " T " (true). 
Absence of this mark means disagreement. 
4.43r The expression of the agreement and disagree-
ment with the truth-possibilities of the elementary 
propositions expresses the truth-conditions of the 
proposition. 
The proposition is the expression of its truth­
conditions. 
(Frege has therefore quite rightly put them at 
the beginning, as explaining the signs of his 
logical symbolism. Only Frege's explanation 
of the truth-concept is false : if '' the true " and 
"the false" were real objects and the arguments 
in - p, etc., then the sense of - p would by no 
means be determined by Frege's determination.) 
4.44 The sign which arises from the co-ordination of 
that mark "T" with the truth-possibilities is a 
propositional sign. 
4.441 It is clear that to the complex of the signs '' F" 
and "T" no object (or complex of objects) corre­
sponds ; any more than to horizontal and vertical 
lines or to brackets. There are no '' logical 
objects". 
Something analogous holds of course for all 
signs, which express the same as the schemata of 
"T " and " F ''. 
4.442 Thus e.g. 
" p q 
T T T 
F T T 
T F 
F F T' 
is a propositional sign. 
{Frege's assertion sign" I-" is logically altogether 
95 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH·PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
bedeutungslos; er zeigt bei Frege (und Russell) 
nur an, dass diese Autoren die so bezeichneten 
Satze fiir wahr halten. ,,I-'.' gehort daher ebenso 
wenig zum Satzgefiige, wie etwa die Nummer des 
Satzes. Ein Satz kann unmoglich von sich selbst 
aussagen, dass er wahr ist.) 
1st die Reihenfolge der Wahrheitsmoglichkeiten 
im Schema durch eine Kombinationsregel ein fiir 
allemal festgesetzt, dann ist die letzte Kolonne 
allein schon ein Ausdruck der Wahrheitsbedin• 
gungen. Schreiben wir diese Kolonne als Reihe 
hin, so wird das Satzzeichen zu: 
,,(WW-W) (p, q)'' oder deutlicher ,,(WWFW) 
(p,q)". 
(Die Anzahl der Ste}len in der linken Klammer 
ist durch die Anzahl der Glieder in der rechten 
bestimmt.) 
4.45 Fiir n Elementarsatze gibt es L 0 mogliche Grup-
pen von Wahrheitsbedingungen. 
Die Gruppen von W ahrheitsbedingungen, 
welche zu den Wahrheitsmoglichkeiten einer 
Anzahl von Elementarsatzen gehoren, lassen sich 
in eine Reihe ordnen. 
4.46 U nter den moglichen Gruppen von W ahrheits-
bedingungen gibt es zwei extreme Falle. 
In dem einen Fall ist der Satz fiir samtliche 
Wahrheitsmoglichkeiten der Elementarsatze wahr. 
Wir sagen, die W ahrheitsbedingungen sind 
tau to 1 o g i sch. 
Im zweiten Fall ist der Satz fiir samtliche 
Wahrheitsmoglichkeiten falsch : Die Wahrheits• 
bedingungen sind k on t rad i k tor is c h. 
Im ersten Fall nennen wir den Satz eine 
Tautologie, im zweiten Fall eine Kontradiktion. 
4.461 Der Satz zeigt was er sagt, die Tautologie und 
die Kontradiktion, dass sie nichts sagen. 
Die Tautologie hat keine Wahrheitsbe­
dingungen, denn sie ist bedingungslos wahr; und 
96 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
meaningless; in Frege (and Russell) it only shows 
that these authors hold as true the propositions 
marked in this way. 
"I-" belongs therefore to the propositions no 
more than does the num her of the proposition. A 
proposition cannot possibly assert of itself that it 
is true.) 
If the sequence of the truth-possibilities in the 
schema is once for all determined by a rule of 
combination, then the last column is by itself an 
expression of the truth-conditions. If we write 
this column as a row the propositional sign becomes: 
"(T T-T) (p,q) ", or more plainly: ''(TT FT) 
(p,q) ". 
(The n um her of places in the left-hand bracket 
is determined by the number of terms in the right­
hand bracket.) 
4.45 For n elementary propositions there are Ln 
possible groups of truth-conditions. 
The groups of truth-conditions which belong to 
the truth-possibilities of a number of elementary 
propositions can be ordered in a series. 
4.46 Among the possible groups of truth-conditions 
there are two extreme cases. 
In the one case the proposition is true for all the 
truth-possibilities of the elementary propositions. 
We say that the truth-conditions are tautological. 
In the second case the proposition is false for all 
the truth-possibilities. The truth-conditions are 
self-contradictory. 
In the first case we call the proposition a 
tautology, in the second case a contradiction. 
4.461 The proposition shows what it says, the 
tautology and the contradiction that they say 
nothing. 
The tautology has no truth-conditions, for it is 
97 G 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
die Kontradiktion ist unter keiner Bedingung 
wahr. 
Tautologie und Kontradiktion sind sinnlos. 
(Wie der Punkt von dem zwei Pfeile in 
entgegengesetzter Richtung auseinandergehen.) 
(Ich weiss z. B. nichts iiber das Wetter, wenn 
ich weiss, dass es regnet oder nicht regnet.) 
4.4611 Tautologie und Kontradiktion sind aber nicht 
unsinnig; sie gehoren zum Symbolismus, und 
zwar ahnlich wie die ,,o" zum Symbolismus der 
Arithmetik. 
4.462 Tautologie und Kontradiktion sind nicht Bilder 
der Wirklichkeit. Sie stellen keine mogliche 
Sachlage dar. Denn jene lasst j e de mogliche 
Sachlage zu, diese k e i n e. 
In der Tautologie heben die Bedingungen der 
Ubereinstimmung mit der Welt-die darstellenden 
Bezieh ungen-einander auf, so dass sie in keiner 
darstellenden Beziehung zur Wirklichkeit steht. 
4.463 Die W ahrheitsbedingungen bestimmen den 
Spielraum, der den Tatsachen durch den Satz 
gelassen wird. 
(Der Satz, das Bild, das Modell, sind 1m 
negativen Sinne wie ein fester Karper, der die 
Bewegungsfreiheit der anderen beschrankt ; im 
positiven Sinne, wie der von fester Substanz 
begrenzte Raum, worin ein Korper Platz hat.) 
Die-Tautologie lasst der \Virklichkeit den ganzen 
-unendlichen-logischen Raum ; die Kontradik­
tion erfiillt den ganzen logischen Raum und lasst 
der Wirklichkeit keinen Punkt. Keine von beiden 
kann daher die Wirklichkeit irgendwie bestimmen. 
4.464 Die W ahrheit der Tautologie ist gewiss, des 
Satzes moglich, der Kontradiktion unmoglich. 
(Gewiss, moglich, unmoglich: Hier haben wir 
das Anzeichen jener Gradation, die wir in der 
Wahrscheinlichkeitslehre brauchen.) 
4.465 Das logische Produkt einer Tautologie und 
98 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
unconditionally true; and the contradiction 1s on 
no condition true. 
Tautology and contradiction are without sense. 
(Like the point from which two arrows go out in 
opposite directions.) 
(I know, e.g. nothing about the weather, when 
I know that it rains or does not rain.) 
Tautology and contradictinn are, however, not 
nonsensical ; they are part of the symbolism, in the 
same way that "o" is part of the symbolism of 
Arithmetic. 
Tautology and contradiction are not pictures of 
the reality. They present no possible state of 
affairs. For the one allows every possible state 
of affairs, the other none. 
In the tautology the conditions of agreement 
with the world-the presenting relations-cancel 
one another, so that it stands in no presenting 
relation to reality. 
The truth-conditions determine the range, which 
is left to the facts by the proposition. 
(The proposition, the picture, the model, are in 
a negative sense like a solid body, which restricts 
the free movement of another: in a positive sense, 
like the space limited by solid substance, in which 
a body may be placed.) 
Tautology leaves to reality the whole infinite 
logical space ; contradiction fills the whole logical 
space and leaves no point to reality. Neither of 
them, therefore, can in any way determine 
reality. 
The truth of tautology is certain, of propositions 
possible, of contradiction impossible. 
(Certain, possible, impossible : here we have 
an indication of that gradation which we need in 
the theory of probability.) 
The logical product of a tautology and a pro-
99 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
eines Satzes sagt dasselbe, wie der Satz. Also ist 
jenes Produkt identisch mit dem Satz. Denn man 
kann das W esentliche des Sym bots nicht andern, 
ohne seinen Sinn zu andern. 
4.466 Einer bestimmten logischen Verbindung von 
Zeichen entspricht eine bestimmte logische Ver­
bindung ihrer Bedeutungen; j e de be 1 i e big e 
Verbindung entspricht nur den unverbundenen 
Zeichen. 
Das heisst, Satze die fi.ir jede Sachlage wahr 
sind, konnen i.iberhaupt keine Zeichenverbindungen 
sein, denn sonst konnten ihnen nur bestimmte 
Verbindungen von Gegenstanden entsprechen. 
(U nd keiner logischen Verbindung entspricht 
k e in e Verbindung der Gegenstande.) 
Tautologie und Kontradiktion sind dieGrenzfalle 
der Zeichenverbindung, namlich ihre Auflosung. 
4.466I Freilich sind auch in der Tautologie und Kon-
tradiktion die Zeichen noch mit einander verbun­
den, d. h. sie stehen in Beziehungen zu einander, 
aber diese Beziehungen sind bedeutungslos, dem 
Sy m b o 1 unwesentlich. 
4.5 Nun scheint es rnoglich zu sein, die allgemeinste 
Satzform anzugeben: das heisst, eine Beschreibung 
der Satze irgend einer Zeichensprache zu geben, 
so dass jeder mogliche Sinn <lurch ein Symbol, 
auf welches die Beschreibung passt, ausgedri.ickt 
werden kann, und dass jedes Symbol, worauf die 
Beschreibung passt, einen Sinn ausdrilcken kann, 
wenn die Bedeutungen der Namen entsprechend 
gewahlt werden. 
Es ist klar, <lass bei der Beschreibung der 
allgemeinsten Satzform nu r ihr Wesentliches 
beschrieben werden darf,-sonst ware sie namlich 
nicht die allgemeinste. 
Dass es eine allgemeine Satzform gibt, wird 
dadurch bewiesen, dass es keinen Satz geben darf, 
<lessen Form man nicht hatte voraussehen (d. h. 
IOO 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
position says the same as the proposition. There­
fore that product is identical with the proposition. 
For the essence of the symbol cannot be altered 
without altering its sense. 
4.466 To a definite logical combination of signs 
corresponds a definite logical corn bi nation of their 
meanings ; every arbi'trary corn bi nation only corre­
sponds to the unconnected signs. 
That is, propositions which are true for every 
state of affairs cannot be corn bi nations of signs at 
all, for otherwise there could only correspond td 
them definite combinations of objects. 
(And to no logical combination corresponds no 
combination of the objects.) 
Tautology and contradiction are the limiting 
cases of the corn bi nations of sym bots, namely their 
dissolution. 
4.4661 Of course the signs are also combined with one 
another in the tautology and contradiction, £.e. 
they stand in relations to one another, but these 
relations are meaningless, unessential to the 
symbol. 
4.5 Now it appears to be possible to give the 
most general form of proposition ; £.e. to give a 
description of the propositions of some one sign 
language, so that every possible sense can be 
expressed by a symbol, which falls under the 
description, and so that every symbol which falls 
under the description can express a sense, if 
the meanings of the names are chosen accord­
ingly. 
It is clear that in the description of the most 
general form of proposition only what is essential 
to it may be described-otherwise it would not be 
the most general form. 
That there is a general form is proved by the 
fact that there cannot be a proposition whose 
form could not have been foreseen (£.e. constructed). 
IOI 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
konstruieren) konnen. Die a11gemeine Form des 
Satzes ist: Es verhalt sich so und so. 
4.51 Angenommen, mir waren a 11 e Elementarsatze 
gegeben : Dann }asst sich einfach fragen : welche 
Satze kann ich aus ihnen bilden. U nd das sind 
a 11 e Satze und so sind sie begrenzt. 
4.52 Die Satze sind Alles, was aus der Gesamtheit 
aller Elementarsatze folgt (natiirlich auch daraus, 
classes die Ge s am the i t a 11 er ist). (So konnte 
man in gewissem Sinne sagen, class a 11 e Satze 
Verallgemeinerungen der Elementarsatze sind.) 
4.53 Die allgemeine Satzform ist eine Variable. 
5 Der Satz ist eine W ahrheitsfunktion der Ele-
mentarsatze. 
(Der Elementarsatz ist eine Wahrheitsfunktion 
seiner selbst.) 
5.01 Die Elementarsatze sind die W ahrheitsar-
gumente des Satzes. 
5.02 Es liegt nahe, die Argumente von Funktionen 
mit den Indices von Namen zu verwechseln. Ich 
erkenne namlich sowohl am Argument wie am 
Index die Bedeutung des sie enthaltenden Zeichens. 
In Russell's,,+ c" ist z. B. ,,c" ein Index, der darauf 
hinweist, dass das ganze Zeichen das Additions­
zeichen fiir Kardinalzahlen ist. Aber diese Bezeich­
n ung · beruht auf willkiirlicher Ubereinkunft und 
man konnte statt ,, + c" auch ein einfaches Zeichen 
wahlen ; in ,, - p" abet ist ,,p" kein Index, sondern 
ein Argument: der Sinn von ,, - p" k an n n i c h t 
verstanden werden, ohn~ dass vorher der Sinn von 
,,p" verstanden worden ware; (Im Namen Julius 
Casar ist ,,Julius" ein Index. Der Index ist immer 
ein Teil einer Beschreibung des Gegenstandes, 
dessen Namen wir ihn anhangen. Z. B. Der 
Casar aus dem Geschlechte der J ulier.) 
Die Verwechslung von Argument und Index 
liegt, wenn ich mich nicht irre, der Theorie Frege's 
von der Bedeutung der Satze und Funktionen 
102 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
The general form of proposition is : Such and 
such is the case. 
4.51 Suppose all elementary propositions were given 
me: then we can simply ask: what propositions I 
can build out of them. And these are all pro­
positions and so are they limited. 
4.52 The propositions are everything which follows 
from the totality of all elementary propositions ( of 
course also from the fact that it is the totality of 
them all). (So, in some sense, one could say, that 
all propositions are generalizations of the elemen­
tary propositions.) 
4.53 The general propositional form is a variable. 
5 Propositions are truth-functions of elementary 
propositions. 
(An elementary proposition is a truth-function 
of itself.) 
5.01 The elementary propositions are the truth-argu-
ments of propositions. 
5.02 It is natural to confuse the arguments of 
functions with the indices of names. For I 
recognize the meaning of the sign containing it 
from the argument just as much as from the 
index. 
In Russell's " + c'', for example, " c " ts an 
index which indicates that the whole sign is the 
addition sign for cardinal num hers. But this way 
of symbolizing depends on arbitrary agreement, 
and one could choose a simple sign instead of 
'' + o'': but in '' ,_ p" '' p" is not an index but 
an argument ; the sense of '' ,,. p" cannot be under­
stood, unless the sense of "P" has previously been 
understood. (In the name Julius Cresar, Julius is 
an index. The index is always part of a descrip­
tion of the object to whose name we attach it, e.g. 
The Cresar of the Julian gens.) 
The confusion of argument and index is, if I 
am not mistaken, at the root of Frege's theory 
103 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
zugrunde. Fiir Frege waren die Satze der Logik 
N amen, und deren Argumente die Indices dieser 
Namen. 
5. I Die Wahrheitsfunktionen lassen sich in Reihen 
ordnen. 
Das ist die Grundlage der W ahrscheinlichkeits­
lehre. 
5. IOI Die W ahrheitsfun ktionen jeder Anzahl von 
Elementarsatzen lassen sich in einem Schema 
folgender Art hinschreiben : 
(WWW W) (p, q) Tautologie (Wenn p, sop; und wenn q, so q.) (p::::, p. q::::, q) 
(F W W W) (p, q) in Worten : Nicht beides p und q. ( - (p. q)) 
(W F WW) (p, q) ,, ,, Wenn q, sop. (q ::> p) 
(W W F W) (p, q) ,, ,, Wenn p, so q. (p ::> q) 
(W W W F) (p, q) ,, ,, p oder q. (pvq) 
(F F W W) (p, q) ,, ,, Nicht q. ( - q) 
(F W F W) (p, q) ,, ,, Nicht p. ( - p) 
(F W W F) {p, q) ,, ,, p, oder q, abernicht beide. (p. - q: v: q. - p) · 
(W F F W) (p, q) ,, ,, W enn p, so q ; und wenn q, so p. (p-q) 
(W F W F) (p, q) ,, ,, p 
(W W F F) (p, q) ,, ,, q 
(F F F W) (p, q) ,, ,, Weder p noch q. (-p. - q) oder (plq) 
(F F W F) (p, q) ,, ,, p und nicht q. (p. - q) 
(F W F F) (p, q) ,, ,, q und nicht p. (q. - p) 
(W F F F) (p, q) ,, ,, q und p. (q. p) 
(F F F F) (p, q)Kontradiktion(pundnichtp; undqundnichtq.)(p. - p.q. - q) 
Diejenigen Wahrheitsmoglichkeiten semer 
W ahrheitsargumente, welche den Satz bewahr­
heiten, will ich seine Wahr he its gr i.i n de 
nennen. 
5. II Sind die W ahrheitsgrtinde, die einer Anzahl 
von Satzen gemeinsam sind, samtlich auch Wahr­
heitsgriinde eines bestimmten Satzes, so sagen 
wir, die W ahrheit dieses Satzes folge aus der 
Wahrheit jener Satze. 
5. I2 I nsbesondere folgt die W ahrheit eines Satzes 
,,p" aus der Wahrheit eines anderen ,,q", wenn 
alle W ahrheitsgriinde des zweiten W ahrheits­
griinde des ersten sind. 
104 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACT A TUS LOG ICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
of the meaning of propositions and functions. For 
Frege the propositions of logic were names and 
their arguments the indices of these names. 
5. l The truth-functions can be ordered m 
series. 
That is the foundation of the theory of prob­
ability. 
5.101 The truth-functions of every number of elemen-
tary propositions can be written in a schema of 
the following kind : 
(T TT T) (p, q) Tautology (if p then p, and if q then q) (p :::,p. q:::, q] 
(FT TT) (p, q) in words: Not both p and q. [ ,._ (p. q)] 
(T FT T) (p, q) ,, ,, If q then p. [q :::,p] 
(T T F T)(p, q),, ,, If p then q. [p:::,q] 
(T TT F) (p, q) ,, ,, p or q. [pvq] 
(F FTT) (p, q),, ,, Not q. [,.,, q] 
(FT FT) (p, q),, ,, Not p. [,.,, p] 
(FT T F) (p, q) ,, ,, p or q, but not both. (p. ,.,, q : v : q. ,.,, p] 
(T FF T) (p, q) ,, ,, If p, then q J. and if q, then p. [p-q] 
(T FT F) (p, q) ,, ,, p 
(T T F F) (/J, q) ,, ,, q 
(F FF T) (p, q),, ,, Neither p nor q. [ -p. ,.,, q or p lq] 
(F FT F) (p, q),, ,, p and not q. [p.,.,, q] 
(FT FF) (/J, q),, ,, q _and not p. (q. - p] 
(T F F F) (p, q) ,, ,, p and q. [p. q] 
(F FF F) (p, q) Contradiction (p and notp_; andqand not q.) [p. ,.,, p. 9. ,.,, q] 
Those truth-possibilities of its truth-arguments, 
which verify the proposition, I shall call its truth­
grounds. 
5.11 If the truth-grounds which are common to a 
number of propositions are all also truth-grounds 
of some one proposition, we say that the truth of 
this proposition follows from the truth of those 
propositions. 
5.12 In particular the truth of a proposition p follows 
from that of a proposition q, if all the truth .. 
grounds of the second are truth-grounds of the 
first. 
105 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
5.121 Die Wahrheitsgriinde des einen sind in denen 
des anderen enthalten; p folgt aus q. 
5. 122 Folgt p aus q, so ist der Sinn von ,,p" im 
Sinne von ,,q" enthalten. 
5.123 Wenn ein Gott eine Welt erschafft, worin 
gewisse Satze wahr sind, so schafft er damit auch 
schon eine Welt, in welcher alle ihre Folgesatze 
stimmen. U nd ahnlich konnte er keine Welt 
schaffen, worin der Satz ,,p" wahr ist, ohne seine 
samtlichen Gegenstande zu schaffen. 
5. 124 Der Satz bejaht jeden Satz der aus ihm 
folgt. 
5. 1241 ,, p . q" ist einer der Satze, welche ,, p" bejahen 
und zugleich einer der Satze, welche ,,q" 
bejahen. 
Zwei Satze sind einander entgegengesetzt, wenn 
es keinen sinnvollen Satz gibt, der sie beide 
bejaht. 
J eder Satz der einem anderen widerspricht, 
verneint ihn. 
5.13 Dass die Wahrheit eines Satzes aus der Wahr-
heit anderer Satze folgt, ersehen wir aus der 
Struktur der Satze. 
5.131 Folgt die Wahrheit eines Satzes aus der Wahr-
heit anderer, so driickt sich dies durch Beziehun­
gen aus, in welchen die Formen jener Satze zu 
einander stehen ; und zwar brauchen wir sie nicht 
erst in jene Beziehungen zu setzen, indem wir 
sie in einem Satze miteinander verbinden, sondern 
diese Beziehungen sind intern und bestehen, sobald, 
und dadurch dass, jene Satze bestehen. 
5.1311 Wenn wir von pvq und ,., p auf ,q schliessen, 
so ist bier durch die Bezeichnungsweise die Bezie­
hung der Satzformen von ,,pvq" und ,, ,., p" ver­
hiillt. Schreiben wir aber z. B. statt ,,pvq" 
,,plq •I• plq" und statt ,,,.,p" ,,pfp" (plq=weder 
p, noch q), so wird der innere Zusammenhang 
offenbar. 
106 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
5.121 The truth-grounds of q are contained in those 
of p; p follows from q. 
5.122 If p follows from q, the sense of'' p" is contained 
in that of "q ". 
5.123 If a god creates a world in which certain pro-
positions are true, he creates thereby also a world 
in which all propositions consequent en them are 
true. And similarly he could not create a world 
in which the proposition '' p" is true without 
creating all its objects. 
5.124 A proposition asserts every proposition which 
follows from it. 
5.1241 "p. q" is one of the propositions which assert 
'' p " and at the same time one of the propositions 
which assert "q ". 
Two propositions are opposed to one another 
if there is no significant proposition which asserts 
them both. 
Every proposition which contradicts another, 
denies it. 
5.13 That the truth of one proposition follows from 
the truth of other propositions, we perceive from 
the structure of the propositions. 
5. 131 If the truth of one proposition follows from the 
truth of others, this expresses itself in relations in 
which the forms of these propositions stand to one 
another, and we do not need to put them in these 
relations first by connecting them with one another 
in a proposition ; for these relations are internal, 
and exist ':1-s soon as, and by the very fact that, 
the propositions exist. 
5.1311 When we conclude from pvq and - p to q the 
relation between the forms of the propositions 
'' pvq " and '' - p " is here concealed by the method 
of symbolizing. But if we write, e.g. instead of 
"pvq " "P I q -I• P I q " and instead of " - p " 
"p Ip" (P I q = neither p nor q), then the inner 
connexion becomes obvious. 
107 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
5.132 
5.133 
5.134 
5.135 
5.136 
(Dass man aus (x). fx auf fa schliessen kann, 
das zeigt, dass die Allgemeinheit auch im Symbol 
,,(x). fx" vorhanden ist.) 
Folgt p aus q, so kann ich von q auf p schliessen; 
p aus q folgern. 
Die Art des Schlusses ist allein aus den beiden 
Satzen zu entnehmen. 
N ur sie selbst konnen den Schluss rechtfertigen. 
,,Schlussgesetze", welche-wie bei Frege und 
Russell-die Schliisse rechtfertigen sollen, sind 
sinnlos, und waren iiberfliissig. 
Alles Folgern geschieht a priori. 
Aus einem Elementarsatz lasst sich kein anderer 
folgern. 
Auf keine Weise kann aus dem Bestehen irgend 
einer Sachlage auf das Bestehen einer, von ihr gan­
zlich verschiedenen Sachlage geschlossen werden. 
Einen Kausalnexus, der einen solchen Schluss 
rechtfertigte, gibt es nicht. 
Die Ereignisse der Zukunft k 6 n n en wir nicht 
aus den gegenwartigen erschliessen. 
Der Glau be an den Kausalnexus ist der Aber­
g I au be. 
Die Willensfreiheit besteht darin,dass zukiinftige 
Handlungen jetzt nicht gewusst werden konnen. 
Nur dann konnten wir sie wissen, wenn die Kau­
salitat eine i n n e re N otwendigkeit ware, wie die 
des logischen Schlusses.-Der Zusammenhang 
von Wissen und Gewusstem, ist der der logischen 
Notwendigkeit. 
(,,A weiss, dass p der Fall ist" ist sinnlos, wenn 
p eine Tautologie ist.) 
W enn daraus, dass ein Satz uns einleuchtet, 
nicht f o 1 g t, dass er wahr ist, so ist das Ein­
leuchten auch keine Rechtfertigung fiir unseren 
Glauben an seine Wahrheit. 
Folgt ein Satz aus einem anderen, so sagt 
dieser mehr als jener, jener weniger als dieser. 
108 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

5.133 
5.134 
5.135 
5.136 
TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
(The fact that we can infer fa from (x) .fx shows 
that generality is present also in the symbol 
"(x) .fz ". 
If p follows from q, I can conclude from q to p; 
infer p from q. 
The method of inference is to be understood 
from the two propositions alone. 
Only they themselves can justify the inference. 
Laws of inference, which - as in Frege and 
Russell-are to justify the conclusions, are sense­
less and would be superfluous. 
All inference takes place a priori. 
From an elementary proposition no other can 
be inferred. 
In no way can an inference be made from the 
existence of one state of affairs to the existence of 
another entirely different from it. 
There is no causal nexus which justifies such 
an inference. 
The events of the future cannot be inferred from 
those of the present. 
Superstition is the belief m the causal 
nexus. 
The freedom of the will consists in the fact that 
future actions cannot be known now. We could 
only know them if causality were an Z:nner necessity, 
like that of logical deduction.-The connexion 
of knowledge and what is known is that of logical 
necessity. 
(" A knows that p is the case " is senseless if p 
is a tautology.) 
5. 1363 If from the fact that a proposition is obvious 
to us it does notfollow that it is true, then obvious­
ness is no justification for our belief in its truth. 
5.14 If a proposition follows from another, then the 
latter says more than the former, the former less 
than the latter. 
109 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
5.141 Folgt p aus q und q aus p, so sind sie ein und 
dersel be Satz. 
5.142 Die Tautologie folgt aus allen Satzen : sie sagt 
Nichts. 
5.143 Die Kontradiktion ist das Gemeinsame der 
Satze, was k e in Satz mit einem anderen gemein 
hat. Die Tautologie ist das Gemeinsame aller 
Satze, welche nichts miteinander gemein haben. 
Die Kontradiktion verschwindet sozusagen 
ausserhalb, die Tautologie innerhalb aller Satze. 
Die Kontradiktion ist die aussere Grenze der 
Satze, die Tautologie ihr substanzloser Mittelpunkt. 
5.15 1st Wr die Anzahl der Wahrheitsgri.inde des 
Satzes ,,r", Wrs die Anzahl derjenigen Warheits­
griinde des Satzes,,s",die zugleich Wahrheitsgrunde 
von ,,r" sind, dann nennen wir das Verhaltnis: Wrs: 
Wr das Mass der Wahrscheinlichkeit, welche 
der Satz ,,r" dem Satz ,,s" gi bt. 
5.151 Sei in einem Schema wie dem obigen in No. 
5.IOI Wr die Anzahl der ,,W" im Satze r; wrs die 
Anzahl derjenigen ,,W" im Satze s, die in gleiche'n 
Kolonnen mit ,, W" des Satzes r stehen. Der Satz 
r gibt dann dem Satze s die Wahrscheinlichkeit: 
Wrs: Wr. 
5. 1511 Es gibt keinen besonderen Gegenstand, der den 
W ahrscheinlichkeitssatzen eigen ware. 
5.152 Satze, welche keine Wahrheitsargumente mit 
einander gemein haben, nennen wir von einander 
unabhangig. 
Zwei Elementarsatze geben einander die Wahr­
scheinlichkeit ½• 
Folgt p aus q, so gibt der Satz ,,q" dem Satz 
,,p" die Wahrscheinlichkeit I. Die Gewissheit 
des logischen Schlusses ist ein Grenzfall der 
Wahrscheinlichkeit. 
(Anwendung auf Tautologie und Kontradiktion.) 
5.153 Ein Satz ist an sich weder wahrscheinlich noch 
IIO 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
5.r4r If p follo~s from q and q from p then they are 
one and the same proposition. 
5.142 A tautology follows from all propositions: it 
says nothing. 
5.143 Contradiction is something shared by proposi-
tions, which no proposition has in common with 
another. Tautology is that which is shared by 
all propositions, which have nothing in common 
with one another. 
Contradiction vanishes so to speak outside, 
tautology inside all propositions. 
Contradiction is the external limit of the pro­
positions, tautology their substanceless centre. 
5. r5 If Tr is the n um her of the truth-grounds of the 
proposition "r", Trs the number of those truth­
grounds of the proposition '' s" which are at the 
same time truth-grounds of '' r ", then we call the 
ratio Tr,: Tr the measure of the probability which 
the proposition " r" gives to the proposition "s ". 
5.r5r Suppose in a schema like that above in No. 
5.101 Tr is the n um her of the '' T " 's in the pro­
position r, Tr, the number of those "T" 's in 
the proposition s, which stand in the same columns 
as "T " 's of the proposition r; then the proposi­
tion r gives to the proposition s the probability 
Tr,: Tr• 
5.1511 There is no special object peculiar to probability 
propositions. 
5.152 Propositions which have no truth-arguments 
in common with one another we call independent. 
Two elementary propositions give to one another 
the probability ½-
If p follows from q, the proposition q gives 
to the proposition p the probability r. The 
certainty of logical conclusion is a limiting case 
of probability. 
(Application to tautology and contradiction.) 
5.153 A proposition is in itself neither probable nor 
III 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
unwahrscheinlich. Ein Ereignis trifft ein, oder 
es trifft nicht ein, ein Mittelding gibt es nicht. 
5. 154 In einer U rne seien gleich viel weisse und 
schwarze Kugeln (und keine anderen). Ich ziehe 
eine Kugel nach der anderen und lege sie wieder 
in die U rne zuriick. Dann kann ich <lurch den 
Versuch feststellen, <lass sich die Zahl en der 
gezogenen schwarzen und weissen Kugeln bei 
fortgesetztem Ziehen einander nahern. 
Das ist also kein mathematisches Faktum. 
Wenn ich nun sage: Es ist gleich wahr­
scheinlich, <lass ich eine weisse Kugel wie eine 
schwarze ziehen werde, so heisst das : Alle mir 
bekan n ten U mstande ( die hypothetisch angenom­
menen Naturgesetze mitinbegriffen) geben dem 
Eintreffen des einen Ereignisses nicht me h r 
Wahrscheinlichkeit als dem Eintreffen des anderen. 
Das heisst, sie geben-wie aus den obigen Er­
klarungen leicht zu entnehmen ist-jedem die 
Wahrscheinlichkeit ½• 
Was ich <lurch den Versuch bestatige ist, <lass 
das Eintreffen der beiden Ereignisse von den Um­
standen, die ich nicht naher kenne, unabhangig ist. 
5.155 Die Einheit des Wahrscheinlichkeitssatzes ist: 
Die U mstande-die ich sonst nicht weiter kenne­
geben dem Eintreffen eines bestimmten Ereignisses 
den und den Grad der W ahrscheinlichkeit. 
So ist die Wahrscheinlichkeit eine Verallge­
memerung. 
Sie involviert eine allgemeine Beschreibung 
einer Satzform. 
Nur in Ermanglung der Gewissheit gebrauchen 
wir die Wahrscheinlichkeit.-Wenn wir zwar eine 
Tatsache nicht vollkommen kennen, wohl aber 
et was iiber ihre Form wissen. 
(Ein Satz kann zwar ein unvollstandiges Bild 
einer gewissen Sachlage sein, aber er ist immer 
e i n vollstandiges Bild.) 
ll2 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
improbable. An event occurs or does not occur, 
there is no middle course. 
5.r54 In an urn there are equal numbers of white 
and black balls (and no others). I draw one 
ball after another and put them back in the 
urn. Then I can determine by the experiment 
that the numbers of the black and white balls 
which are drawn approximate as the drawing 
continues. 
So this is not a mathematical fact. 
If then, I say, It is equally probable that 
I should draw a white and a black ball, this 
means, All the circumstances known to me (in­
cluding the natural laws hypothetically assumed) 
give to the occurrence of the one event no more 
probability than to the occurrence of the other. 
That is they give - as can easily be under­
stood from the above explanations-to each the 
probability ½-
What I can verify by the experiment is that 
the occurrence of the two events is independent 
of the circumstances with which I have no closer 
acquaintance. 
5. I55 The unit of the probability proposition is: The 
circumstances-with which I am not further ac­
quainted-give to the occurrence of a definite event 
such and such a degree of probability. 
5. r56 Probability is a generalization. 
It involves a general description of a proposi­
tional form. Only in default of certainty do we 
need probability. 
If we are not completely acquainted with a fact, 
but know something about its form. 
(A proposition can, indeed, be an incomplete 
picture of a certain state of affairs, but it is always 
a corn plete picture.) 
II3 H 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
Der Wahrscheinlichkeitssatz ist gleichsam em 
Auszug aus anderen Satzen. 
5. 2 Die Strukturen der Satze stehen in internen 
Beziehungen zu einander. 
5.21 Wir konnen diese internen Beziehungen 
dadurch in unserer Ausdrucksweise hervorheben, 
dass wir einen Satz als Resultat einer Operation 
darstellen, die ihn aus anderen Satzen ( den Basen 
der Operation) hervorbringt. 
5.22 Die Operation ist der Ausdruck einer Beziehung 
zwischen den Strukturen ihres Resultats und ihrer 
Basen. 
5. 23 Die Operation ist das, was mit dem einen Satz 
geschehen muss,um aus ihmden anderen zu machen. 
5.231 U nd das wird natiirlich von ihren formalen 
Eigenschaften, von der internen Ahnlichkeit ihrer 
Formen abhangen. 
5.232 Die interne Relation, die eine Reihe ordnet, ist 
aquivalent mit der Operation, durch welche ein 
Glied aus dem anderen entsteht. 
5.233 Die Operation kann erst dort auftreten, wo ein 
Satz auf logisch bedeutungsvolle Weise aus einem 
anderen entsteht. Also dort, wo die logische 
Konstruktion des Satzes anfangt. 
5.234 Die Wahrheitsfunktionen der Elementarsatze 
sind Resultate von Operationen, die die Elementar­
satze als Basen haben. (Ich nenne diese Opera­
tionen Wahrheitsoperationen.) 
5.2341 Der Sinn einer Wahrheitsfunktion von p ist 
eine Funktion des Sinnes von p. 
Verneinung, logische Addition, logische M ul­
tiplikation, etc., etc. sind Operationen. 
(Die Verneinung verkehrt den Sinn des Satzes.) 
5.24 Die Operation zeigt sich in einer Variablen ; 
sie zeigt, wie man von einer Form von Satzen zu 
einer anderen gelangen kann. 
Sie bringt den U nterschied der Formen zum 
Ausdruck. 
114 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
The probability proposition is, as it were, an 
extract from other propositions. 
5. 2 The structures of propositions stand to one 
another in internal relations. 
5.2I We can bring out these internal relations in 
our manner of expression, by presenting a pro­
position as the result of an operation which pro­
duces it from other propositions (the bases of the 
operation). 
5. 22 The operation is the expression of a relation 
between the structures of it.s result and its 
bases. 
5. 23 The operation is that which must happen to a 
proposition in order to make another out of it. 
5.23r And that will naturally depend on their formal 
properties, on the internal similarity of their 
forms. 
5.232 The internal relation which orders a series is 
equivalent to the operation by which one term 
arises from another. 
5. 233 The first place in which an operation can occur 
is where a proposition arises from another in a 
logically significant way; £.e. where the logical 
construction of the proposition begins. 
5.234 The truth-functions of elementary proposition, 
are results of operations which have the ele­
mentary propositions as bases. (I call these 
operations, truth-operations.) 
5.234r The sense of a truth-function of p is a function 
of the sense of p. 
Denial, logical addition, logical multiplication, 
etc. etc., are operations. 
(Denial reverses the sense of a proposition.) 
5.24 An operation shows itself in a variable ; it shows 
how we can proceed from one form of proposition 
to another. 
It gives expression to the difference between 
the forms. 
II5 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
(U nd das Gemeinsame zwischen den Basen 
und dem Resultat der Operation sind eben die 
Basen.) 
5.241 Die Operation kennzeichnet keine Form, son-
dern nur den U nterschied der Formen. 
5.242 Dieselbe Operation, die ,,q" aus ,,p" macht, 
macht aus ,,q" ,,r" u. s. f. Dies kann nur darin 
ausgedriickt sein, <lass ,,p", ,,q", ,,r", etc. Variable 
sind, die gewisse formate Relationen allgemein 
zum Ausdruck bringen. 
5.25 Das Vorkommen der Operation charakterisiert 
den Sinn des Satzes nicht. 
Die Operation sagt ja nichts aus, nur ihr Re­
sultat, und dies hangt von den Basen der Operation 
ab. 
(Operation und Funktion diirfen nicht mitein­
ander verwechselt werden.) 
5.251 Eine Funktion kann nicht ihr eigenes Argument 
sein, wohl aber kann das Resultat einer Operation 
ihre eigene Basis werden. 
5.252 Nur so ist das Fortschreiten von Glied zu Glied 
in einer Formenreihe (von Type zu Type in den 
Hierarchien Russells und Whiteheads) moglich. 
(Russell und Whitehead haben die Moglichkeit 
dieses Fortschreitens nicht zugegeben, aber immer 
wieder von ihr Gebrauch gemacht.) 
5.2521 Die fortgesetzte Anwendung einer Operation 
auf ihr eigenes Resultat nenne ich ihre successive 
Anwendung (,,O' O' O' a" ist das Resultat der 
dreimaligen successiven Anwendung von ,,O' [" 
auf ,,a"). 
In einem ahnlichen Sinne rede ich von der 
successiven Anwendung m eh re re r Operationen 
auf eine Anzahl von Satzen. 
5.2522 Das allgemeine Glied einer Formenreihe a, O' a, 
O' O' a, .... schreibe ich daher so: ,,[a, x, O' x]". 
Dieser Klammerausdruck ist eine Variable. Das 
erste Glied des Klammerausdruckes ist der An-
116 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
(And that which is common to the bases, and 
the result of an operation, is the bases them­
selves.) 
5.241 The operation does not characterize a form but 
only the difference between forms. 
5. 242 The same operation which makes '' q" from 
"P ", makes "r" from "q ", and so on. This 
can only be expressed by the fact that '' p ", '' q ", 
" r ", etc., are variables which give general ex­
pression to certain formal relations. 
5. 25 The occurrence of an operation does not charac-
terize the sense of a proposition. 
For an operation does not assert anything; only 
its result does, and this depends on the bases of 
the operation. 
(Operation and function must not be confused 
with one another.) 
5.251 A function cannot be its own argument, but 
the result of an operation can be its own 
basis. 
5.252 Only in this way is the progress from term 
to term in a formal series possible (from type 
to type in the hierarchy of Russell and White­
head). (Russell and Whitehead have not admitted 
the possibility of this progress but have made use 
of it all the same.) 
5. 2521 The repeated application of an operation to 
its own result I call its successive application 
('' O' O' O' a " is the result of the threefold suc­
cessive application of '' O' f" to '' a "). 
In a similar sense I speak of the successive 
application of several operations to a number of 
propositions. 
5. 2522 The general term of the formal series a, O' a, 
O' O' a, .... I write thus: "[a, x, O' x] ". This 
expression in brackets is a variable. The first 
term of the expression is the beginning of the 
Il7 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
fang der Formenreihe, das zweite die Form eines 
beliebigen Gliedes x der Reihe und das dritte 
die Form desjenigen Gliedes der Reihe, welches 
auf x unmittel bar folgt. 
5.2523 Der Begriff der successiven Anwendung der 
Operation ist aquivalent mit dem Begriff ,,und so 
weiter". 
5.253 Eine Operation kann die Wirkung einer anderen 
riickgangig machen. Operationen konnen ein-
ander aufheben. 
5.254 Die Operation kann verschwinden (z. B. die 
Verneinung in,, - - p" - - p= p). 
5.3 Alie Satze sind Resultate von Wahrheitsopera-
tionen mit den Elementarsatzen. 
Die W ahrheitsoperation ist die Art und Weise, 
wie aus den Elementarsatzen die W ahrheitsfunk­
tion entsteht. 
Nach dem Wesen der Wahrheitsoperation wird 
auf die gleiche Weise, wie aus den Elementarsatzen 
ihre Wahrheitsfunktion, aus Wahrheitsfunktionen 
eine Neue. Jede Wahrheitsoperation erzeugt aus 
Wahrheitsfunktionen von Elementarsatzen wieder 
eine Wahrheitsfunktion von Elementarsatzen, einen 
Satz. Das Resultat jeder Wahrheits.operation mit 
den Resultaten von Wahrheitsoperationen mit 
Elementarsatzen ist wieder das Resultat E in er 
Wahrheitsoperation mit Elementarsatzen. 
Jeder Satz ist das Resultat von Wahrheits­
operationen mit Elementarsatzen. 
5.31 Die Schemata No. 4.31 haben auch dann eine 
Bedeutung, wenn ,,p", ,,q", ,,r'', etc. nicht Elemen­
tarsatze sind. 
U nd es ist leicht zu sehen, class das Satzzeichen 
in No. 4.42, auch wenn ,,p" und ,,q" Wahrheits­
funktionen von Elementarsatzen sind, Eine 
Wahrheitsfunktion von Elementarsatzen aus­
driickt. 
5.32 Alie Wahrheitsfunktionen sind Resultate der 
118 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
formal series, the second the form of an arbitrary 
term .r of the series, and the third the form 
of that term of the series which immediately 
follows .r. 
5.2523 The concept of the successive application of 
an operation is equivalent to the concept "and 
soon". 
5.253 One operation can reverse the effect of another. 
Operations can cancel one another. 
5.254 Operations can vanish (e.g. denial in " - - p ,, . 
- - P=P). 
5.3 All propositions are results of truth-operations 
on the elementary propositions. 
The truth -operation is the way in which a 
truth -function arises from elementary proposi­
tions. 
According to the nature of truth-operations, 
in the same way as out of elementary pro­
positions arise their truth-functions, from truth­
functions arises a new one. Every truth-operation 
creates from truth-functions of elementary pro­
positions another truth -function of elementary 
propositions, £.e. a proposition. The result of 
every truth -operation on the results of truth­
operations on elementary propositions is also 
the result of one truth -operation on elementary 
propositions. 
Every proposition is the result of truth-opera­
tions on elementary propositions. 
5.31 The Schemata No. 4.31 are also significant, if 
"P ", "q ", "r ", etc. are not elementary pro­
positions. 
And it is easy to see that the propositional 
sign in No. 4.42 expresses one truth-function of 
elementary propositions even when "p" and 
"q" are truth-functions of elementary proposi­
tions. 
5.32 All truth-functions are results of the successive 
119 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
successiven Anwendung einer endlichen Anzahl 
von Wahrheitsoperationen auf die Elementarsatze. 
5.4 Hier zeigt es sich, <lass es ,,logische Gegen-
stande", ,Jogische Konstante" (im Sinne Freges 
und Russells) nicht gibt. 
5.41 Denn : Alie Resultate von W ahrheitsopera-
tionen mit Wahrheitsfunktionen sind identisch, 
welche eine und dieselbe Wahrheitsfunktion von 
Elementarsatzen sind. 
5.42 Dass v, ::J, etc. nicht Beziehungen im Sinne von 
rechts und links etc. sind, leuchtet ein. 
Die Moglichkeit des kreuzweisen Definierens der 
logischen ,,U rzeichen" Freges und Russells zeigt 
schon, <lass dies keine U rzeichen sind, und schon 
erst recht, dass sie keine Relationen bezeichnen. 
Und es ist offenbar, dass das ,,:::>", welches wir 
<lurch ,, - "und ,,v" definieren, identisch ist mit dem, 
durch welches wir ,,v" mit,, - '' definieren und dass 
dieses ,,v" mit dem ersten identisch ist. U. s. w. 
5.43 Dass aus einer Tatsache p unendlich viele 
andere folgen sollten, namlich - - p, - - - - p, 
etc., ist doch von vornherein kaum zu glauben. 
U nd nicht weniger merkwiirdig ist, <lass die unend­
liche Anzahl der Satze der Logik ( der Mathematik) 
aus einem halben Dutzend ,,Grundgesetzen" folgen. 
Alle Satze der Logik sagen aber dasselbe. Nam• 
lich Nichts. 
5.44 Die Wahrheitsfunktionen sind keine materiellen 
Funktionen. 
Wenn man z. B. eine Bejahung <lurch doppelte 
Verneinung erzeugen kann,ist dann die Verneinung 
-in irgend einem Sinn-in der Bejahung enthalten? 
Verneint,, - - p" - p, oder bejaht esp; oder beides? 
Der Satz ,, - - p" handelt nicht von der Ver• 
neinung wie von einem Gegenstand ; wohl aber ist 
die Moglichkeit der Verneinung in der Bejahung 
bereits prajudiziert. 
U nd gabe es einen Gegenstand, der ,, - " hiesse~ 
120 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
application of a finite number of truth-operations 
to elementary propositions. 
5.4 Here it becomes clear that there are no such 
things as " logical objects" or "logical constants" 
(in the sense of Frege and Russell). 
5.41 For all those results of truth-operations on truth-
functions are identical, which are one and the same 
truth-function of elementary propositions. 
5. 42 That v, :::>, etc., are not relations in the sense of 
right and left, etc., is obvious. 
The possibility of crosswise definition of the 
logical '' primitive signs " of Frege and Russell 
shows by itself that these are not primitive signs 
and that they signify no relations. 
And it is obvious that the '' :J " which we define 
by means of " - " and "v" is identical with that 
by which we define "v" with the help of " - ", and 
that this '' v " is the same as the first, and 
so on. 
5.43 That from a fact p an infinite number of others 
should follow, namely - - p, - - - - p, etc., is 
indeed hardly to be believed, and it is no less 
wonderful that the infinite number of propositions 
of logic (of mathematics) should follow from half 
a dozen " primitive propositions". 
But all propositions of logic say the same thing. 
That is, nothing. 
5.44 Truth-functions are not material functions. 
If e.g. an affirmation can be produced by 
repeated denial, is the denial-in any sense-con­
tained in the affirmation? 
Does " - - p" deny - p, or does it affirm p ; 
or both? 
The proposition '' - - p" does not treat of 
denial as an object, but the possibility of denial is 
already prejudged in affirmation. 
And if there was an object called '' - ", then 
I2I 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
so miisste ,, - - p'' etwas anderes sagen als ,,p". 
Denn der eine Satz wi.irde dann eben von -
handeln, der andere nicht. 
5.441 Dieses Verschwinden der scheinbaren logischen 
Konstanten tritt auch ein, wenn ,, - (Hx) . - fx" 
dassel be sagt wie ,,(x) . fx", oder ,,(Hx) . fx . x = a'' 
dasselbe wie ,,fa". 
5.442 W enn uns ein Satz gegeben ist, so sind m i t 
i h m auch schon die Resultate aller W ahrheitso­
perationen, die ihn zur Basis haben, gegeben. 
5.45 Gibt es logische U rzeichen, so muss eine richtige 
Logik ihre Stellung zueinander klar machen und 
ihr Dasein rechtfertigen. Der Bauder Logik au s 
ihren U rzeichen muss klar werden. 
5.451 Hat die Logik Grundbegriffe, so miissen sie von 
einander unabhangig sein. 1st ein Grundbegriff 
eingefUhrt, so muss er in alien Verbindungen 
eingefohrt sein, worin er iiberhaupt vorkommt. Man 
kann ihn also nicht zuerst fiir e in e Verbindung, 
dann noch einmal for eine andere einfiihren. 
Z. B.: 1st die Verneinung eingefiihrt, so miissen 
wir sie jetzt in Satzen von der Form ,, - p" ebenso 
verstehen, wie in Satzen wie,, - (pvq)", ,,(3x). - fx" 
u. a. Wir diirfen sie nicht erst fiir die eine Klasse 
von Fallen, dann fiir die andere einfiihren, denn es 
bliebe dann zweifelhaft, ob ihre Bedeutung in beiden 
Fallen die gleiche ware und es ware kein Grund 
vorhanden, in beiden Fallen diesel be Art der 
Zeichenverbindung zu beniitzen. 
(Kurz, fiir die Einfiihrung der U rzeichen gilt, 
mutatis mutandis, dasselbe, was Frege (,,Grund­
gesetze der Arithmetik") for die Einfiihrung von 
Zeichen <lurch Definitionen gesagt hat.) 
5.452 Die Einfilhrung eines neuen Behelfes in den Sym-
bolism us der Logik muss immer ein folgenschweres 
Ereignis sein. Kein neuer Behel£ darf in die Logik­
sozusagen, mit ganz unschuldiger Miene-in Klam­
mern oder unter dem Striche eingefiihrt werden. 
122 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
'' - - p" would have to say something other than 
"P ". For the one proposition would then treat 
of - , the other would not. 
5.44r This disappearance of the apparent logical 
constants also occurs if " - (3..i-). - .fx" says the 
same as "(x).fx", or ''(3:x).fx.x=a" the same 
as ''fa". 
5.442 If a proposition is given to us then the results 
of all truth-operations which have it as their basis 
are given with it. 
5.45 If there are logical primitive signs a correct logic 
must make clear their position relative to one 
another and justify their existence. The construc­
tion of logic out of its primitive signs must become 
clear. 
5.45r If logic has primitive ideas these must be 
independent of one another. If a primitive idea 
is introduced it must be introduced in all contexts 
in which it occurs at all. One cannot therefore 
introduce it for one context and then again for 
another. For example, if denial is introduced, 
we must understand it in propositions of the form 
" -p ", just as in propositions like " - (pvq)", 
'' (3..i-) • - fx" and others. We may not first 
introduce it for one class of cases and then for 
another, for it would then remain doubtful whether 
its meaning in the two cases was the same, and 
there would be no reason to use the same way of 
symbolizing in the two cases. 
(In short, what Frege (" Grundgesetze der 
Arithmetik ") has said about the introduction of 
signs by definitions holds, mutatis mutandis, for 
the introduction of primitive signs also.) 
5.452 The introduction of a new expedient in the 
symbolism of logic must always be an event full 
of consequences. No new symbol may be intro­
duced in logic in brackets or in the margin-with, 
so to speak, an entirely innocent face. 
I23 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
(So kommen in den ,,Principia Mathematica" 
von Russell und Whitehead Definitionen und 
Grundgesetze in W orten vor. Warum hier plotz­
lich Worte? Dies bediirfte einer Rechtfertigung. 
Sie fehlt und muss fehten, da das Vorgehen tatsach­
lich unerlaubt ist.) 
Hat sich aber die Einflihrung eines neuen 
Behetfes an einer Stelle als notig erwiesen, so muss 
man sich nun sofort fragen : W o muss dieser 
Behelf nun i mm e r angewandt werden? Seine 
Stellung in der Logik muss nun erklart werden. 
5.453 Alie Zahlen der Logik m iissen sich rechtfertigen 
lassen. 
Oder vielmehr: Es muss sich herausstellen, 
dass es in der Logik keine Zahlen gibt. 
Es gibt keine ausgezeichneten Zahlen. 
5.454 In der Logik gibt es kein Nebeneinander, kann 
es keine Klass-ifikation geben. 
In der Logik kann es nicht Allgemeineres und 
Spezielleres geben. 
5.4541 Die Losungen der logischen Probleme m iissen 
einfach sein, denn sie setzen den Standard der 
Einfachheit. 
Die Menschen haben immer geahnt, dass es ein 
Gebiet von Fragen geben mtisse, deren Antworten 
-a priori-symmetrisch, und zu einem abge­
schlossenen, regelmassigen Gebilde vereint­
liegen. 
Ein Gebiet, in dem der Satz gilt: simplex 
sigillum veri. 
5.46 Wenn man die logischen Zeichen richtig 
einfohrte, so hatte man damit auch schon den Sinn 
aller ihrer Korn binationen eingefiihrt; also nicht 
n ur ,,pvq" sondern auch schon ,, - (p v - q)" etc. 
etc. Man hatte damit auch schon die Wirkung 
aller nur moglichen Kombinationen von Klammern 
eingefiihrt. U nd damit ware es klar geworden, 
dass die eigentlichen allgemeinen U rzeichen nicht 
124 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
(Thus in the "Principia Mathematica" of 
Russell and Whitehead there occur definitions 
and primitive propositions in words. Why sud­
denly words here? This would need a justifica­
tion. There was none, and can be none for the 
process is actually not allowed.) 
But if the introduction of a new expedient has 
proved necessary in one place, we must immedi­
ately ask : Where is this expedient always to be 
used? Its position in logic must be made 
clear. 
5.453 All numbers in logic must be capable of 
justification. 
Or rather it must become plain that there are 
no numbers in logic. 
There are no pre-eminent numbers. 
5.454 In logic there is no side by side, there can be 
no classification. 
In logic there cannot be a more general and a 
more special. 
5.4541 The solution of logical problems must be neat 
for they set the standard of neatness. 
Men have always thought that there must be a 
sphere of questions whose answers - a pnon -
are symmetrical and united into a closed regular 
structure. 
A sphere in which the proposition, simplex 
sigillum veri, is valid. 
5.46 When we have rightly introduced the logical 
signs, the sense of all their combinations has been 
already introduced with them : therefore not only 
"pvq" but also ",,,., (p v,,,., q) ", etc. etc. We should 
then already have introduced the effect of all 
possible combinations of brackets; and it would 
then have become clear that the proper general 
primitive signs are not "pvq ", "(az) .fz", etc., 
125 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOG ISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
die ,,pvq", ,,(Hx). fx", etc. sind, sondern die all­
gemeinste Form ihrer Korn binationen. 
5.461 Bedeutungsvoll ist die scheinbar unwichtige 
Tatsache, dass die logischen Schein beziehungen, 
wie v und ::J, der Klammern bediirfen-im Gegen ... 
satz zu den wirklichen Beziehungen. 
Die Bentitzung der Klammern mit jenen schein­
baren U rzeichen deutet ja schon darauf hin, dass 
diese nicht die wirklichen U rzeichen sind. U nd 
es wird doch wohl niemand glauben, dass die 
Klammern eine selbstandige Bedeutung haben. 
5.4611 Die logischen Operationszeichen sind -Inter-
punktionen. 
5.47 Es ist klar, dass alles was sich iiberhaupt v on 
v or n herein iiber die Form aller Satze sagen 
I asst, sich au f e i n ma I sagen lassen m uss. 
Sind ja schon im Elementarsatze alle logischen 
Operationen enthalten. Denn ,,fa" sagt dasselbe 
wie ,,(ax). fx. x=a". 
Wo Zusammengesetztheit isl, da ist Argument 
und Funktion, und wo diese sind, sind bereits alle 
logischen Konstanten. 
Man konnte sagen: Die Eine logische Konstante 
ist das, was a 11 e Satze, ihrer Natur nach, mit 
einander gemein haben. 
Das aber ist die allgemeine Satzform. 
5.471 Die allgemeine Satzform ist das Wesen des 
Satzes. 
5.471_1 Das Wesen des Satzes angeben, heisst, das 
Wesen aller Beschreibung angeben, also das 
Wesen der Welt. 
5.472 Die Beschreibung der allgemeinsten Satzform 
ist die Beschreibung des einen und emz1gen 
allgemeinen U rzeichens der Logik. 
5.473 Die Logik muss fiir sich selber sorgen. 
Ein mogliches Zeichen muss auch bezeichnen 
konnen. Alles was in der Logik moglich ist, ist 
auch erlaubt. (,,Sokrates ist identisch" heisst darum 
126 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
but the most general form of their corn bi na­
tions. 
5.461 The apparently unimportant fact that the appa-
5.4611 
5.47 
5-471 
5.4711 
5.472 
5.473 
rent relations like v and :::> need brackets-unlike 
real relations-is of great importance. 
The use of brackets with these apparent primi­
tive signs shows that these are not the real 
primitive signs ; and nobody of course would 
believe that the brackets have meaning by them­
selves. 
Logical operation signs are punctuations. 
It is clear that everything which can be said 
beforehand about the form of all propositions at 
all can be said on one occas_ion. 
For all logical operations are already contained 
in the elementary proposition. For "fa" says 
the same as "(3.x-) . fz. z= a". 
Where there is composition, there is argument 
and function, and where these are, all logical 
constants already are. 
One could say: the one logical constant is that 
which all propositions, according to their nature, 
have in common with one another. 
That however is the general form of pro­
position. 
The general form of proposition is the essence 
of proposition. 
To give the essen.ce of proposition means to 
give the essence of all description, therefore the 
essence of the world. 
The description of the most general proposi­
tional form is the description of the one and only 
general primitive sign in logic. 
Logic must take care of itself. 
A possible sign must also be able to signify. 
Everything which is possible in logic is also 
permitted. (" Socrates is identical" means nothing 
127 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
nichts, weil es keine Eigenschaft gibt, die 
,,identisch" heisst. Der Satz ist unsinnig, weil 
wir eine willkiirliche Bestimmung nicht getroffen 
haben, aber nicht darum, weil das Symbol an und 
fiir sich unerlaubt ware.) 
Wir konnen uns, in gewissem Sinne, nicht in 
der Logik irren. 
5.4731 Das Einleuchten, von dem Russell so viel 
sprach, kann nur dadurch in der Logik entbehrlich 
werden, dass die Sprache selbst jeden logischen 
Fehler verhindert.-Dass die Logik a priori ist, 
besteht darin, dass nicht unlogisch gedacht werden 
kan n. 
5.4732 Wir konnen einem Zeichen nicht den unrechten 
Sinn geben. 
5.47321 Occams Devise ist natiirlich keine willkiirliche, 
oder <lurch ihren praktischen Erfolg gerechtfertigte, 
Regel : Sie besagt, dass u n n o t i g e Zeichenein­
heiten nichts bedeuten. 
Zeichen, die Ei nen Zweck erfiillen, sind logisch 
aquivalent, Zeichen, die keinen Zweck erfiillen, 
logisch bedeutungslos. 
5.4733 Frege sagt: J eder rechtmassig gebildete Satz 
rnuss cinen Sinn haben; und ich sage: Jeder 
m6gliche Satz ist rechtmassig gebildet, und wenn er 
keinen Sinn hat, so kann das nur daran liegen, dass 
wir einigen seiner Bestandteile keine Bedeutung 
gegeben haben. 
(Wenn wir auch glauben, es getan zu haben.) 
So sagt ,,Sokrates ist identisch" darum nichts, 
weil wir dem Wort ,,identisch" als Eigenschafts­
wort kei ne Bedeutung gegeben haben. Denn, 
wenn es als Gleichheitszeichen auftritt, so sym­
bolisiert es auf ganz andere Art und Weise - die 
bezeichnende Beziehung ist eine andere, - also ist 
auch das Symbol in beiden Fallen ganz verschieden; 
die beiden Symbole haben nur das Zeichen zufallig 
miteinander gemein. 
128 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
because there is no property which is called 
'' identical ". The proposition is senseless because 
we have not made some arbitrary determination, 
not because the symbol is in itself unpermissible.) 
In a certain sense we cannot make mistakes in 
logic. 
5.4731 Self-evidence, of which Russell has said so 
much, can only be discarded in logic by language 
itself preventing every logical mistake. That 
logic is a priori consists in the fact that we cannot 
think illogically. 
5.4732 We cannot give a sign the wrong sense. 
5.47321 Occam's razor is, of course, not an arbitrary rule 
nor one justified by its practical success. It simply 
says that unnecessary elements in a symbolism 
mean nothing. 
Signs which serve one purpose are logically 
equivalent, signs which serve no purpose are 
logically meaningless. 
5-47:3 Frege says : Every legitimately constructed 
proposition must have a sense; and I say : Every 
possible proposition is legitimately constructed, 
and if it has no sense this can only be because 
we have given no meaning to some of its constituent 
parts. 
(Even if we believe that we have done 
so.) 
Thus '' Socrates is identical" says nothing, 
because we have given no meaning to the word 
"identical" as adjective. For when it occurs as 
the sign of equality it symbolizes in an entirely 
different way-the symbolizing relation is another 
-therefore the symbol is in the two cases entirely 
different ; the two symbols have the sign m 
common with one another only by accident. 
129 I 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
5.474 Die Anzahl der notigen Grundoperationen hangt 
nu r von unserer Notation ab. 
5.475 Es kommt nur darauf an, ein Zeichensystem von 
einer bestimmten Anzahl von Dimensionen - von 
einer bestimmten mathematischen Mannigfaltigkeit 
-· zu bilden. 
5.476 Es ist klar, dass es sich bier nicht um eine 
Anzahl von Grundbegriffen handelt, die 
bezeichnet werden miissen, sondern um den 
Ausdruck einer Regel. 
5.5 J ede Wahrheitsfunktion ist ein Resultat der 
successiven Anwendung der Operation (-----W) 
((, . . . . ) auf Elementarsatze. 
Diese Operation verneint samtliche Satze in der 
rechten Klammer und ich nenne sie die Negation 
dieser Satze. 
5.501 Einen Klammerausdruck, dessen Glieder Satze 
sind, deute ich-wenn die Reihenfolgeder Glieder in 
der Klammer gleichgiiltigist-durch ein Zeichen von 
der Form ,,(i)" an. ,,f" ist eine Variable, deren Werte 
die Glieder des Klammerausdruckes sind ; und der 
Strich iiber der Variablen deutet an, dass sie ihre 
samtlichen Werte in der Klammer vertritt. 
(Hat also f etwa die 3 Werte P, Q, R, so ist 
(l) = (P, Q, R).) 
Die W erte der Variablen werden festgesetzt. 
Die Festsetzung ist die Beschreibung der Satze, 
welche die Variable vertritt. 
Wie die Beschreibung der Glieder des Klammer­
ausdruckes geschieht, ist unwesentlich. 
Wir k o n n e n drei Arten der Beschreibung 
unterscheiden: I. Die direkte Aufzahlung. In 
diesem Fall konnen wir statt der Variablen einfach 
ihre konstanten Werte setzen. 2. Die Angabe 
einer Funktion fx, deren W erte fiir alle Werte von 
x die zu beschreibenden Satze sind. 3. Die Angabe 
eines formalen Gesetzes, nach welchem jene Satze 
gebildet sind. In diesem Falle sind die Glieder des 
130 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
5.474 The number of necessary fundamental opera-
tions depends only on our notation. 
5.475 It is only a question of constructing a system 
of signs of a definite number of dimensions-of 
a definite mathematical multiplicity. 
5.476 It is clear that we are not concerned here with 
a number of primitive ideas which must be signified 
but with the expression of a rule. 
5.5 Every truth-function is a result of the successive 
application of the operation (-- - --T Xf, .... ) to 
elementary propositions. 
This operation denies all the propositions in 
the right-hand bracket and I call it the negation 
of these propositions. 
5.501 An expression in brackets whose terms are 
propositions I indicate-if the order of the terms 
in the bracket is indifferent-by a sign of the form 
"(f) ". "[" is a variable whose values are the 
terms of the expression in brackets, and the line 
over the variable indicates that it stands for all 
its values in the bracket. 
(Thus if f has the 3 values P, Q, R, then 
(~)= (P, Q, R).) 
The values of the variables must be determined. 
The determination is the description of the pro­
positions which the variable stands for. 
How the description of the terms of the expres­
sion in brackets takes place is unessential. 
We may distinguish 3 kinds of description: 
I. Direct enumeration. In this case we can place 
simply its constant values instead of the variable. 
2. Giving a function fx, whose values for all 
values of x are the propositions to be described. 
3. Giving a formal law, according to which those 
propositions are constructed. In this case the 
131 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
5.502 
5.503 
5-51 
5.5II 
5.512 
5.5r3 
Klammerausdrucks samtliche Glieder einer For­
menreihe. 
lch schreibe also statt ,,(-- - --W)(f, .... )" 
,,N (t)". 
N(t) ist die Negation samtlicher Werte der 
Satzvariablen f. 
Da sich offenbar leicht ausdriicke~ lasst, wie mit 
dieser Operation Sat~e gebildet werden konnen und 
wie Satze mit ihr nicht zu bilden sind, so muss 
dies auch einen exakten Ausdruck finden konnen. 
Hat [nur einen Wert, so ist N(l) = - p (nicht p), 
hat es zwei W erte, so ist N (e) = - p . - q (weder 
p noch q). 
Wie kann die allumfassende, weltspiegelnde 
Logik so spezielle Haken und Manipulationen 
gebrauchen? Nur, indem sich alle diese zu einem 
unendlich feinen N etzwerk, zu dem grossen Spiegel, 
verkniipfen. 
,, - p" ist wahr, wenn ,,p" falsch ist. Also in 
dem wahren Satz ,, - p" ist ,,p" ein falscher Satz. 
Wie kann ihn nun der Strich ,, ,.., " mit der Wirk­
lichkeit zum Stirn men bringen? 
Das, was in ,, - p" verneint, ist aber nicht das 
,, - ", sondern dasjenige, was alien Zeichen dieser 
Notation, welche p verneinen, gemeinsam ist. 
Also die gemeinsame Regel, nach welcher 
,, - p",,, - - - p", ,, - p v -p", ,, - p . -p", etc. etc. 
(ad inf.) gebildet werden. U nd dies Gemeinsame 
spiegelt die Verneinung wieder. 
Man konnte sagen : Das Gemeinsame aller Sym­
bole, die sowohl p als q bejahen, ist der Satz 
,,p . q". Das Gemeinsame aller Symbole, die 
entweder p oder q bejahen, ist der Satz ,,pvq". 
Und so kann man sagen: Zwei Satze sind 
einander entgegengesetzt, wenn sie nichts mitei­
nander gemein haben, und : J eder Satz hat nur ein 
Negativ, weil es nur einen Satz gibt, der ganz 
ausserhalb seiner liegt. 
132 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
terms of the expression in brackets are all the 
terms of a formal series. 
5.502 Therefore I write instead of '' {- - -- - T) 
( g, . . . . } "' " N (t} ,, . 
N (f) is the negation of al 1 the values of the 
propositional variable f. 
5.503 As it is obvi'ously easy to express how proposi-
tions can be constructed by means of this operation 
and how propositions are not to be constructed by 
means of it, this must be capable of exact expression. 
5.5r If g has only one value, then N (t} = - p (not p), 
if it has two values then N (g) = -p. - q (neither 
p nor q). 
5.5rr How can the all-em bracing logic which mirrors 
the world use such special catches and manipula­
tions? Only because all these are connected into 
an infinitely fine network, to the great mirror. 
5.512 " - p" is true if "p" is false. Therefore in the 
true proposition '' - p " '' p" is a false proposition. 
How then can the stroke " - " bring it into 
agreement with reality? 
That which denies in " - p" is however not 
" - ", but that which all signs of this notation, 
which deny p, have in common. 
Hence the common rule according to which 
"-p", " - - -P", "-pv-p", "-p.-p", 
etc. ·etc. (to infinity) are constructed. And this 
which is common to them all mirrors denial. 
5.5r3 We could say: What is common to all symbols, 
which assert both p and q, is the proposition 
"P. q ". What is common to all symbols, which 
assert either p or q, is the proposition "pvq ". 
And similarly we can say: Two propositions 
are opposed to one another when they have 
nothing in common with one another; and every 
proposition has only one negative, because there 
is only one proposition which lies altogether 
outside it. 
133 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
Es zeigt sich so auch in Russells Notation, dass 
,,q : p v -p" dassel be sagt wie ,,q" ; dass ,,p v - p" 
nichtssagt. 
5.514 1st eine Notation festgelegt, so gibt es in ihr eine 
Regel, nach der alle p verneinenden Satz gebildet 
werden, eine Regel, nach der alle p bejahenden 
Satze gebildet werden, eine Regel, nach der alle 
p oder q bejahenden Satze gebildet werden, u. s. f. 
Diese Regeln sind den Symbolen aquivalent 
und in ihnen spiegelt sich ihr Sinn wieder. 
5.515 Es muss sich an unseren Symbolen zeigen, dass 
das, was durch ,,v'', ,, . ", etc. miteinander verbunden 
ist, Satze sein miissen. 
U nd dies ist auch der Fall, denn das Symbol ,,p" 
und ,,q" setzt ja selbst das ,,v", ,, - ", etc. voraus. 
Wenn das Zeichen ,,p" in ,,pvq" nicht fiir ein kom­
plexes Zeichen steht, dann kann es allein nicht 
Sinn haben ; dann konnen aber auch die mit ,,p" 
gleichsinnigen Zeichen ,,pvp'', ,,p. p", etc. keinen 
Sinn haben. W enn aber ,,pvp" keinen Sinn hat, 
dann kann auch ,,pvq" keinen Sinn haben. 
5.5151 Muss das Zeichen des negativen Satzes mit dem 
Zeichen des positiven gebildet werden? Warum 
sollte man den negativen Satz nicht <lurch eine ne­
gative Tatsache ausdriicken konnen. (Etwa : Wenn 
,,a" nicht in einerbestimmten Beziehung zu ,,b" steht, 
konnte das ausdriicken, dass a Rb nicht der Fall ist.) 
Aber auch hier ist ja der negative Satz indirekt 
<lurch den positiven gebildet. 
Der positive Satz muss die Existenz des nega­
tiven Satz e s voraussetzen und umgekehrt. 
5.52 Sind die W erte von f samtliche W erte emer 
Funktion fx fur alle W erte von x, so wird 
N(~) = - (Hx). fx. 
5.521 Ich trenne den Begriff Alie von der Wahrheits-
funktion. 
F.rege und Russell haben die Allgemeinheit in 
Verbindung mit dem logischen Produkt oder der 
134 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
Thus in Russell's notation also it appears evident 
that "q :p v - p '' says the same as "q" ; that 
"P v - p" says nothing. 
5.514 If a notation is fixed, there is in it a rule accord-
ing to which all the propositions denying p are 
constructed, a rule according to which all the 
propositions asserting p are constructed, a rule 
according to which all the propositions asserting 
p or q are constructed, and so on. These rules 
are equivalent to the symbols and in them their 
sense is mirrored. 
5.515 It must be recognized in our symbols that what 
is connected by "v ", ". ", etc., must be proposi­
tions. 
And this is the case, for the sym bots '' p " and 
"q" presuppose "v", ",,.,, ", etc. If the sign 
'' p" in '' pvq" does not stand for a complex sign, 
then by itself it cannot have sense ; but then also 
the signs "pvp", "p.p", etc. which have the 
same sense as "P" have no sense. If, however, 
"pvp" has no sense, then also "pvq " can have 
no sense. 
5.5151 Must the sign of the negative proposition be 
constructed by means of the sign of the positive? 
Why should one not be able to express the 
negative proposition by means of a negative fact? 
(Like: if ''a." does not stand in a certain relation 
to '' b ", it could express that aRb is not the case.) 
But here also the negative proposition is in­
directly constructed with the positive. 
The positive prbposition must presuppose the 
existence of the negative proposition and con­
versely. 
5.52 If the values of fare the total values of a func-
tionfx for all values of x, then N(l) = - (3x). fx. 
5.521 I separate the concept all from the truth-function. 
Frege and Russell have introduced generality 
in connexion with the logical product or the logical 
135 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
logischeh Summe eingefiihrt. So wurde es schwer, 
die Satze ,,(3:x). fx" und ,,(x). fx", in welchen beide 
ldeen beschlossen liegen, zu verstehen. 
5.522 Das Eigentiimliche der Allgemeinheitsbezeich-
nung ist erstens, dass sie auf ein logisches Ur­
bild hinweist, und zweitens, dass sie Konstante 
hervorhe bt. 
5.523 Die Allgemeinheitsbezeichnung tritt als Argu-
ment auf. 
5.524 Wenn die Gegenstande gegeben sind, so sind 
uns damit auch schon alle Gegenstande gegeben. 
Wenn die Elementarsatze gegeben sind, so sind 
damit auch a 11 e Elementarsatze gegeben. 
5.525 Es ist unrichtig, den Satz ,,{3:x) . fx" - wie 
Russell dies tut-in Worten <lurch ,,fx ist.moglich" 
wiederzugeben. 
Gewissheit, Moglichkeit oder U nmoglichkeit 
einer Sachlage wird nicht <lurch einen Satz ausge­
driickt, sondern dadurch, <lass ein Ausdruck eine 
Tautologie, ein sinnvoller Satz, oder eine Kontra­
diktion ist. 
J ener Prazedenzfall, auf den man sich immer 
berufen mochte, muss schon im Symbol selber 
liegen. 
5.526 Man kann die Welt vollstandig durch voll-
kommen verallgemeinerte Satze beschreiben, das 
heisst also, ohne i rgend einen N amen von vorn­
herein einem bestimmten Gegenstand zuzuordnen. 
Um dann auf die gewohnliche Ausdrucksweise 
zu kommen,muss man einfach nach einem Ausdruck 
,,es gibt ein und nur ein x, welches .... '' sagen: 
U nd dies x ist a. 
5.526I Ein vollkommen verallgemeinerter Satz ist, wie 
jeder andere Satz zusammengesetzt. (Dies zeigt 
sich daran, dass wir in ,,(3:x, </>). </>x" ,,</>" und ,,x" 
getrennt erwahnen miissen. Beide stehen unab­
hangig in bezeichnenden Beziehungen zur Welt, 
wie im unverallgemeinerten Satz.) 
r36 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
sum. Then it would be difficult to understand 
the propositions" (3.r) .fz" and" (z) .fz" in which 
both ideas lie concealed. 
5.522 That which is peculiar to the "symbolism of 
generality" is firstly, that it refers to a logical 
prototype, and secondly, that it makes constants 
prominent. 
5.523 The generality symbol occurs as an argu-
ment. 
5.524 If the objects are given, therewith are all objects 
also given. 
If the elementary propositions are given, then 
therewith all elementary propositions are also 
given. 
5.525 It is not correct to render the proposition 
"(3.r) . fz "-as Russell does-in words "fz is 
posslble ''. 
Certainty, possibility or impossibility of a state 
of affairs are not expressed by a proposition but 
by the fact that an expression is a tautology, a 
significant proposition or a contradiction. 
That precedent to which one would always 
appeal, must be present in the symbol itself. 
5.526 One can describe the world completely by 
completely generalized propositions, i.e. without 
from the outset co-ordinating any name with a 
definite object. 
In order then to arrive at the customary way 
of expression we need simply say after an ex­
pression ''there is one and only one x, which ..•. ": 
and this x is a. 
5.526I A completely generalized proposition is like 
every other proposition c~mposite. (This is shown 
by the fact that in "(3.r, </>). </>z" we must mention 
"</>" and "z" separately. Both stand inde­
pendently in signifying relations to the world 
as in the ungeneralized proposition.) 
IJ7 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
Kennzeichen des zusammengesetzten Symbols: 
Es hat etwas mit anderen Symbolen gemeinsam. 
5.5262 Es verandertja die Wahr- oder Falschheitjedes 
Satzes etwas am allgemeinen Bau der Welt. Und 
der Spielraum, welcher ihrem Bau <lurch die 
Gesamtheit der Elementarsatze gelassen wird, ist 
eben derjenige, welchen die ganz allgemeinen 
Satze begrenzen. 
(Wenn ein Elementarsatz wahr ist, so ist damit 
doch jedenfalls Ein Elementarsatz me h r wahr.) 
5.53 Gleichheit des Gegenstandes drilcke ich <lurch 
Gleichheit des Zeichens aus, und nicht mit Hilfe 
eines Gleichheitszeichens. Verschiedenheit der 
Gegenstande <lurch Verschiedenheit der Zeichen. 
5.5301 Dass die Identitat keine Relation zwischen Ge-
genstanden ist, Ieuchtet ein. Dies wird sehr klar, 
wenn man z. B. den Satz ,,(x) : fx. :::>. x = a" 
betrachtet. Was dieser Satz sagt, ist einfach, 
dass n u r a der Funktion f genilgt, und nicht, 
dass nur solche Dinge der Funktion f geniigen, 
welche eine gewisse Beziehung zu a haben. 
Man konnte nun freilich sagen, <lass eben nu r 
a diese Beziehung zu a habe, aber um dies auszu­
driicken, brauchten wir das Gleichheitszeichen 
selber. 
5.5302 Russells Definition von ,, =" geniigt nicht; weil 
man nach ihr nicht sagen kann, dass zwei Gegen­
stande alle Eigenschaften gemeinsam haben. 
(Sel bst wen n dieser Satz nie richtig ist, hat er 
doch Sinn.) 
5.5303 Beilaufig gesprochen : Von z we i Dingen zu 
sagen, sie seien identisch, ist ein U nsinn, und von 
E in em zu sagen, es sei identisch mit sich selbst, 
sagt gar nichts. 
5.531 Ich schreibe also nicht ,,f(a, b) . a= b", sondern 
,,f(a,a)" (oder ,.f(b, b)"). U nd nicht ,,f(a, b) . - a= b", 
soridern ,,f(a, b)". 
5.532 U nd analog: Nicht ,,(3x,y) . f(x,y) . x = y", 
138 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
A characteristic of a composite symbol: it has 
something_in common with other symbols. 
5.5262 The truth or falsehood of every proposition alters 
something in the general structure of the world. 
And the range which is allowed to its structure by 
the totality of elementary propositions is exactly 
that which the completely general propositions 
delimit. 
(If an elementary proposition is true, then, at 
any rate, there is one more elementary proposition 
true.) 
5.53 Identity of the object I express by identity of 
the sign and not by means of a sign of identity. 
Difference of the objects by difference of the 
signs. 
5.5301 That identity is not a relation between objects is 
obvious. This becomes very clear if, for example, 
one considers the proposition '' (x) : fx . :l . x = a ". 
What this proposition says is simply that only 
a satisfies the function f, and not that only such 
things satisfy the function f which have a certain 
relation to a. 
One could of course say that in fact only 
a has this relation to a, but in order to express 
this we should need the sign of identity itself. 
5.5302 Russell's definition of '' =" won't do; because 
according to it one cannot say that two objects 
have -all their properties in common. (Even if 
this proposition is never true, it is nevertheless 
significant.) 
5.5303 Roughly speaking: to say of two things that 
they are identical is nonsense, and to say of one 
thing that it is identical with itself is to say 
nothing. 
5.531 I write therefore not "f(a,b). a= b", but "f(a,a)" 
(or "f(b,b)"). And not "/(a,b). ,_ a=b", but 
"/(a,b)". 
5.532 And analogously: not "(3:xv1) .f(x,y). x=y ", 
139 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
5.5321 
5.533 
5.534 
5.535 
5.5351 
sondern ,,(3x). f(x,x)"; und nicht ,,(3x,y). f(x,y). 
,_ x = y", sondern ,,(3x, y) . f (x, y)". 
(Also statt des Russell'schen ,,(3x,y) . f(x,y)": 
,,{3x,y). f(x,y). v. (3x). f(x,x)".) 
Statt ,,(x) : fx:::>x = a" schreiben wir also z. B. 
,,(3x). fx.::,. fa:,_ (3x,y). fx. fy". 
U nd der Satz ,,nu r Ein x befriedigt f( )" lautet: 
,,(3x) . fx: ,.,_ {3x,y). fx. fy". 
Das Gleichheitszeichen ist also kein wesentlicher 
Bestandteil der Begriffsschrift. 
Und nun sehen wir, dass Scheinsatze wie: 
,,a= a", ,,a= b. b =c. ::,a= c'', ,,(x) . x = x", ,,(3x). 
x =a", etc. sich in einer richtigen Begriffsschrift gar 
nicht hinschreiben lassen. 
Damit erledigen sich auch alle Probleme, die 
an solche Scheinsatze gekniipft waren. 
Alle Probleme, die Russells ,,Axiom of Infinity'' 
mit sich bringt, sind schon hier zu losen. 
Das, was das Axiom of infinity sagen soll, wiirde 
sich in der Sprache dadurch ausdriicken, dass es 
unendlich viele N amen mit verschiedener Bedeu­
tung gabe. 
Es gibt gewisse Fa.lie, wo man in Versuchung 
gerat, Ausdrticke van der Form ,,a= a" oder ,,p:::>p" 
u. dgl. zu bentitzen. U nd zwar geschieht dies, 
wenn man von dem U rbild : Satz, Ding, etc. reden 
mochte. So hat Russell in den ,,Principles of 
Mathematics" den U nsinn ,,p ist ein Satz" in Sym­
bolen durch ,,p::,p'' wiedergegeben und als Hypo­
these vor gewisse Satze gestellt, damit deren 
Argumentstellen nur von Satzen besetzt werden 
konnten. 
(Es ist schon darum U nsinn, die Hypothese 
p::Jp vor einen Satz zu stellen, um ihm Argumente 
der richtigen Form zu sichern, weil die Hypothese 
fiir einen Nicht-Satz als Argument nicht falsch, 
sondern unsinnig wird, und weil der Satz selbst 
durch die unrichtige Gattung von Argumenten 
140 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
but '' (3:z) . f(x,x) " ; and not '' (3x,y) . f(x,y) . 
,,,_ x = y ", but " (3:x,y) . f(x,y) ". 
(Therefore instead of Russell's "(3:x,y) .f(x,y)" : 
" (3.x-,y) . /(x,y). v. (3.x-) .f (x,r) ".) 
5.5321 Instead of "(x) : fz-::Jz =a" we therefore write 
e.g. " (3:-x") • fx. -::J. fa : ,,,_ ( 3:x,y) . fz .fy ". 
And the proposition "only one z satisfies/ ( ) " 
reads: "(3:x) .fz: ,,,_ (3:.x-,y) .fx .fy ". 
5.533 The identity sign is therefore not an essential 
constituent of logical notation. 
5.534 And we see that apparent propositions like : 
"a=a", "a=b. b=c. -::Ja=c", "(z).x=z", "{3:.x-). 
z=a ", etc. cannot be written in a correct logical 
notation at all. 
5.535 So all problems disappear which are connected 
with such pseudo-propositions. 
This is the place to solve all the problems which 
arise through Russell's "Axiom of Infinity". 
What the axiom of infinity is meant to say 
would be expressed in language by the fact that 
there is an infinite number of names with different 
meanings. 
5.5351 There are certain cases in which one is tempted 
to use expressions of the form ''a= a " or '' P-::JP " 
As, for instance, when one would speak of the 
archetype Proposition, Thing, etc. So Russell in the 
Princi'ples of Mathematics has rendered the nonsense "p 
is a proposition " in symbols by up -::J p " and has 
put it as hypothesis before certain propositions to 
show that their places for arguments could only 
be occupied by propositions. 
(It is nonsense to place the hypothesis p -::J p 
before a proposition in order to ensure that its 
arguments have the right form, because the 
hypothesis for a non-proposition as argument 
becomes not false but meaningless, and because 
the proposition itself becomes senseless for argu-
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
unsinnig wird, also sich selbst ebenso gut, oder so 
schlecht, vor den unrechten Argumenten bewahrt, 
wie die zu diesem Zweck angehangte sinnlose 
Hypothese.) 
5. 5352 Ebenso wollte man ,,Es gibt keine D i n g e" aus-
driicken durch ,, - (3x). x = x". Aber selbst wenn 
dies ein Satz ware,-ware er nicht auch wahr, wenn 
es zwar ,,Dinge gabe", aber diese nicht mit sich 
selbst identisch waren? 
5.54 In der allgemeinen Satzform kommt der Satz im 
Satze nur als Basis der Wahrheitsoperationen vor. 
5.541 Auf den ersten B.lick scheint es, als konne ein Satz 
in einem anderen auch auf andere W eisevorkommen. 
Besonders in gewissen Satzformen. der Psycho­
logie, wie ,,A glaubt, dass p der Fall ist", oder 
,,A denkt p", etc. 
Hier scheint es namlich oberflachlich, als sttinde 
der Satz p zu einem Gegenstand A in einer Art 
von Relation. 
(U nd in der modernen Erkenntnistheorie (Rus­
sell, Moore, etc.) sind jene Satze auch so aufgefasst 
worden.) 
5.542 Es ist aber klar, dass ,,A glaubt, dass p", ,,A 
denkt p'', ,,A sagt p" von der Form,, ,p' sagt p" sind: 
U nd bier handel't es sich nicht um eine Zuordnung 
von einer Tatsache und einem Gegenstand, sondern 
um die Zuordnung von Tatsachen <lurch Zuordnung 
ihrer Gegenstande. 
5.5421 Dies zeigt auch, dass die Seele-das Subjekt, 
etc.-wie sie in der heutigen oberflachlichen Psy­
chologie auf gefasst wird, ein U nding ist. 
Eine zusammengesetzte Seele ware namlich 
keine Seele mehr. 
5.5422 Die richtige Erklarung der Form des Satzes ,,A 
urteilt p" muss zeigen, dass es unmoglich ist, einen 
U nsinn zu urteilen. {Russells Theorie geniigt 
dieser Bedingung nicht.) 
5.5423 Einen Komplex wahrnehmen, heisst, wahrnehmen, 
142 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
ments of the wrong kind, and therefore it survives 
the wrong arguments no better and no worse 
than the senseless hypothesis attached for this 
purpose.) 
5.5352 Similarly it was proposed to express'' There are 
no things " by " ,.., {3.r). z=z ". But even if this 
were a proposition-would it not be true if indeed 
"There were things", but these were not identical 
with themselves? 
5.54 In the general propositional form, propositions 
occur in a proposition only as bases of the truth­
operations. 
5.541 At first sight it appears as if there were also a 
different way in which one proposition could occur 
in another. 
Especially in certain propositional forms of 
psychology, like " A thinks, that p is the case", 
or " A thinks p ", etc. 
Here it appears superficially as if the proposition 
p stood to the object A in a kind of relation. 
(And in modern epistemology (Russell, Moore, 
" etc.) those propositions have been conceived in 
this way.) 
5.542 But it is clear that "A believes that p ", " A 
thinksp ", "A says p ", are of the form '' 'P' says 
p" : and here we have no co-ordination of a fact 
and an object, but a co-ordination of facts by 
means of a co-ordinatiQn of their objects. 
5. 5421 This shows that there is no such thing as the 
soul-the subject, etc.-as it is conceived in con­
temporary superficial psychology. 
A composite soul would not be a soul any 
longer. 
5.5422 The correct explanation of the form of the 
proposition "A judges p" must show that it is 
impossible to judge a nonsense. (Russell's theory 
does not satisfy this condition.) 
5.5423 To perceive a complex means to perceive that 
143 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
dass sich seine Bestandteile so und so zu einander 
verhalten. 
Dies erklart wohl auch, dass man die Figur 
6 b 
auf zweierlei Art als Wiirfel sehen kann; und alle 
ahnlichen Erscheinungen. Denn wir sehen eben 
wirklich zwei verschiedene Tatsachen. 
(Sehe ich erst auf die Ecken a und nur fliichtig 
auf b, so erscheint a vorne ; und umgekehrt.) 
5.55 Wir miissen nun die Frage nach alien moglichen 
Formen der Elementarsatze a priori beantworten. 
Der Elementarsatz besteht aus N amen. Da wir 
aber die Anzahl der Namen von verschiedener 
Bedeutung nicht angeben konnen, so konnen wir 
auch nicht die Zusammensetzung des Elementar­
satzes angeben. 
5.551 Unser Grundsatz ist, dass jede Frage, die sich 
iiberhaupt durch die Logik entscheiden lasst, sich 
ohne weiteres entscheiden lassen muss. 
(U nd wenn wir in die Lage kommen, ein solches 
Problem <lurch Ansehen der Welt beantworten zu 
miissen, so zeigt dies, dass wir auf grundfalscher 
Fahrte sind.) 
5.552 Die ,,Erfahrung", die wir zum Verstehen der 
Logik brauchen, ist nicht die, dass sich etwas so 
und so verhalt, sondern, dass etwas is t: aber das 
ist eben k e in e Erfahrung. 
Die Logik ist v or jeder Erfahrung-dass etwas 
so ist. 
Sie ist vor dem Wie, nicht vor dem Was. 
144 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
its constituents are corn bined in such and such a 
way. 
This perhaps explains that the figure 
6 b 
can be seen in two ways as a cube; and all similar 
phenomena. For we really see two different facts. 
(If I fix my eyes first on the corners a and only 
glance at b, a appears in front and b behind, and 
vice versa.) 
5.55 We must now answer a priori the question 
as to all possible forms of the elementary pro­
positions. 
The elementary proposition consists of names. 
Since we cannot give the number of names with 
different meanings, we cannot give the composition 
of the elementary proposition. 
5.551 Our fundamental principle is that every question 
which can be decided at all by logic can be decided 
off-hand. 
(And if we get into a situation where we need 
to answer such a problem by looking at the world, 
this shows that we are on a fundamentally wrong 
track.) 
5.552 The '' experience " which we need to under-
stand logic is not that such and such is the 
case, but that something ls; but that is no experi­
ence. 
Logic precedes every experience-that something 
IS SO. 
It is before the How, not before the Wnat. 
145 K 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
5.5521 U nd wenn dies nicht so ware, wie konnten wir 
die Logik anwenden? Man konnte sagen: Wenn 
es eine Logik gabe, auch wenn es keine Welt gabe, 
wie konnte es dann eine Logik geben, da es eine 
Welt gibt. 
5.553 Russell sagte, es gabe einfache Relationen 
zwischen verschiedenen Anzahlen von Dingen 
(Individuals). Aber zwischen welchen Anzahlen? 
Und wie soll sich das entscheiden ?-Durch die 
Erfahrung? 
(Eine ausgezeichnete Zahl gibt es nicht.) 
5.554 Die Angabe jeder speziellen Form ware voll-
kommen willkiirlich. 
5.5541 Es soll sich a priori angeben lassen, oh ieh z. B. 
in die Lage kommen kann, etwas mit dem 
Zeichen einer 27-stelligen Relation bezeichnen zu 
miissen. 
5.5542 Diirfen wir denn aber ilberhaupt so fragen? 
Konnen wir eine Zeichenform aufstellen und nicht 
wissen, ob ihr etwas entsprechen konne? 
Hat die Frage einen Sinn: Was muss s e in, 
damit etwas der-Fall-sein kann? 
5.555 Es ist klar, wir haben vom Elementarsatz einen 
Begriff, abgesehen von seiner besonderen logischen 
Form. 
Wo man aber Symbole nach einem System 
bilden kan n, dort ist dieses System das logisch 
wichtige und nicht die einzelnen Symbole. 
Und wie ware es auch moglich, <lass ich es in 
der Logik mit Formen zu tun hatte, die ich erfinden 
kann ; sondern mit dem muss ich es zu tun haben, 
was es mir moglich macht, sie zu erfinden. 
5.556 Eine Hierarchie der Formen der Elementar-
satze kann es nicht geben. Nur was wir selbst 
konstruieren, konnen wir voraussehen. 
5.5561 Die empirische Realitat ist begrenzt <lurch die 
Gesamtheit der Gegenstande. Die Grenze zeigt 
sich wieder in der Gesamtheit der Elementarsatze. 
146 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
5.5521 And if this were not the case, how could 
we apply logic? We could say : if there 
were a logic, even if there were no world, 
how then could there be a logic, since there is a 
world? 
5.553 Russell said that there were simple relations 
between different numbers of things (individuals). 
But between what numbers? And how should 
this be decided-by exper_ience? 
(There is no pre-eminent number.) 
5.554 The enumeration of any special forms would 
be entirely arbitrary. 
5.5541 How could we decide a priori whether, for 
example, I can get into a situation in which I need 
to symbolize with a sign of a 27-termed relation ? 
5.5542 May we then ask this at all? Can we set out 
a sign form and not know whether anything can 
correspond to it? 
Has the question sense : what must there be 
in order that anything can be the case ? 
5.555 It is clear that we have a concept. of the 
elementary proposition apart from its special 
logical form. 
Where, however, we can build symbols 
according to a system, there this system is the 
logically important thing and not the single 
symbols. 
And how would it be possible that I should 
have to deal with forms in logic which I can 
invent: but I must have to deal with that which 
makes it possible for me to invent them. 
5.556 There cannot be a hierarchy of the forms of the 
elementary propositions. Only that which we 
ourselves construct can we foresee. 
5.5561 Empirical reality is limited by the totality of 
objects. The boundary appears again in the 
totality of elementary propositions. 
147 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
Die Hierarchien sind, und miissen unabhangig 
von der Realitiit sein. 
5.5562 Wissen wir aus rein logischen Grunden, dass 
es Elementarsatze geben muss, dann muss es jeder 
wissen, der die Satze in ihrer unanalysierten Form 
versteht. 
5.5563 Alie Satze unserer U mgangssprache sind tatsach .. 
lich, so wie sie sind, logisch vollkommen geordnet. 
-Jenes Einfachste, was wir bier angeben sollen, 
ist nicht ein Gleichnis der Wahrheit, sondern die 
voile Wahrheit selbst. 
(U nsere Probleme sind nicht abstrakt, sondern 
vielleicht die konkretesten, die es gibt.) 
5.557 Die An wend u n g der Logik entscheidet 
dariiber, welche Elementarsatze es gibt. 
Was in der Anwendung liegt, kann die Logik 
nicht vorausnehmen. 
Das ist klar : Die Logik darf mit ihrer Anwen­
d ung nicht kollidieren. 
Aber die Logik muss sich mit ihrer Anwendung 
beriihren. 
Also diirfen die Logik und ihre Anwendung 
einander nicht iibergreifen. 
5.5571 Wenn ich die Elementarsatze nicht a priori 
angeben kann, dann muss es zu offenbarem U nsinn 
fiihren, sie angeben zu wollen. 
5.6 Die Gr e n z en m e i n er S p r ache bedeuten 
die Grenzen meiner Welt. 
5.61 Die Logik erfiillt die Welt; die Grenzen der 
Welt sind auch ihre Grenzen. 
Wir konnen also in der Logik nicht sagen : Das 
und das gibt es in der Welt, jenes nicht. 
Das wiirde namlich scheinbar voraussetzen, <lass 
wir gewisse Moglichkeiten ausschliessen und dies 
kann nicht der Fall sein, da sonst die Logik 
iiber die Grenzen der Welt hinaus miisste; wenn 
sie namlich diese Grenzen auch von der anderen 
Seite betrachten konnte. 
148 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
The hierarchies are and must be independent 
of reality. 
5.5562 If we know on purely logical grounds, that 
there must be elementary propositions, then this 
must be known by everyone who understands 
propositions in their unanalysed form. 
5.5563 All propositions of our colloquial language are 
actually, just as they are, logically completely 
in order. That simple thing which we ought to 
give here is not a model of the truth but the complete 
truth itself. 
(Our problems are not abstract but perhaps the 
most concrete that there are.) 
5.557 The application of logic decides what elementary 
5.5571 
5.61 
propositions there are. 
What lies in its application logic cannot anticipate. 
It is clear that logic may not conflict with its 
application. 
But logic must have contact with its application. 
Therefore logic and its application may not 
overlap one another. 
If I cannot give elementary propositions a 
priori then it must lead to obvious nonsense to 
try to give them. 
The limits of my language mean the limits of my 
world. 
Logic fills the world : the limits of the world 
are also its limits. 
We cannot therefore say in logic: This and 
this there is in the world, that there is not. 
For that would apparently presuppose that we 
exclude certain possibilities, and this cannot be 
the case since otherwise logic must get outside 
the limits of the world: that is, if it could 
consider these limits from the other side 
also. 
149 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
5.632 
Was wir nicht denken konnen, das konnen wir 
nicht denken; wir konnen also auch nicht sage n, 
was wir nicht denken konnen. 
Diese Bemerkung gibt den Schlussel zur 
Entscheidung der Frage, inwieweit der Solipsismus 
eine Wahrheit ist. 
Was der Solipsismus namlich me in t, ist ganz 
richtig, nur lasst es sich nicht sage n, sondern es 
zeigt sich. 
Dass die Welt m ei ne Welt ist,daszeigtsichdarin, 
dass die Grenzen de r Sprache ( der Sprache,dieallein 
ich verstehe) die Grenzen me i n er Welt beaeuten. 
· Die Welt und das Leben sind Ei'ns. 
Ich bin meine Welt. (Der Mikrokosmos.) 
Das denkende, vorstellende, Subjekt gibt esnicht. 
Wenn ich ein Buch schriebe ,,Die Welt, ·wie ich 
sie vorfand", so ware darin auch tiber meinen Leib 
zu berichten und zu sagen, welche Glieder meinem 
Willen unterstehen · und welche nicht etc., dies ist 
namlich eine Methode, das Subjekt zu isolieren, 
oder vielmehr zu zeigen, dass es in einem wichtigen 
Sinne kein Subjekt gibt: Von ihm allein namlich 
konnte in diesem Buche n i c h t die Rede sein.-
Das Subjekt gehort nicht zur Welt, sondern es 
ist eine Grenze der Welt. 
Wo in der Welt ist ein metaphysisches Subjekt 
zu merken? 
Du sagst, es verhalt sich hier ganz, wie mit Auge 
und Gesichtsfeld. Aber das Auge siehst du wirklich 
n i c h t. 
Und nichts am Ge sic h t sf e Id lasst darauf 
schliessen, <lasses von einem Auge gesehen wird. 
5.6331 Das Gesichtsfeld hat namlich nicht etwa eine 
solche Form : 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
What we cannot think, that we cannot think: 
we cannot therefore say what we cannot 
think. 
This remark provides a key to the question, to 
what extent solipsism is a truth. 
In fact what solipsism means, is quite correct, 
only it cannot be said, but it shows itself. 
That the world is my world, shows itself in 
the fact that the limits of the language (the 
language which I understand) mean the limits of 
my world. 
The world and life are one. 
I am my world. (The microcosm.) 
The thinking, presenting subject ; there is no 
such thing. 
If I wrote a book '' The world as I found it", 
I should also have therein to report on my body 
and say which members obey my will and whici1 
do not, etc. This then would be a method of 
isolating the subject or rather of showing that in 
an important sense there is no subject: that is to 
say, of it alone in this book mention could not be 
made. 
The subject does not belong to the world but 
it is a limit of the world. 
Where in the world is a metaphysical subject to 
be noted? 
You say that this case is altogether like that of 
the eye and the field of sight. But you do not 
really see the eye. 
And from nothing in the field of sight can it -be 
concluded that it is seen from an eye. 
For the field of sight has not a form like this: 
Eye_ 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
5.634 Das hangt damit zusammen, class kein Teil 
unserer Erfahrung auch a priori ist. 
Alles, was wir sehen, konnte auch anders 
sem. 
Alles, was wir iiberhaupt beschreiben konnen, 
konnte auch anders sein. 
Es gibt keine Ordnung der Dinge a priori. 
5~64 Hier sieht man, dass der Solipsismus, streng 
durchgefiihrt, mit dem reinen Realismus zusam­
menfallt. Das Ich des Solipsism us schrum pft zum 
ausdehnungslosen Punkt zusammen, und es bleibt 
die ihm koordinierte Realitat. 
5.641 Es gibt also wirklich einen Sinn, in welchem in 
der Philosophie nicht-psychologisch vom lch die 
Rede sei n kan n. 
Das Ich tritt in die Philosophie dadurch ein, 
dass die ,,Welt meine Welt ist". 
Das philosophische Ich ist nicht der Mense~, 
nicht der menschliche Karper, oder die menschlicQe 
Seele, von der die Psychologie handelt, sondern das 
metaphysische Subjekt, die Grenze-nicht ein Teil 
der Welt. 
6 Die allgemeine Form der Wahrheitsfunktion ist: 
[p, '{, N (l)]. 
Dies ist die allgemeine Form des Satzes. 
6.oor Dies sagt nichts anderes, als dass jeder Satz ein 
Resultat der successiven Anwendung der Operation 
N' (i) auf die Elemen tarsatze ist. 
6.002 1st die allgemeine Form gegeben, wie ein Satz 
gebaut ist, so ist damit auch schon die allgemeine 
Form davon gegeben, wie aus einem Satz durch 
eme Operation em anderer erzeugt werden 
kann. 
6.or Die allgemeine Form der Operation Q' (~) ist 
also: [ l, N (l) ]' (-;j) ( = [~, l, N (i)]). 
Das ist die allgemeinste Form des Uberganges 
von einem Satz zum anderen. 
152 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
5.634 This is connected with the fact that no part of 
our experience is also a priori. 
Everything we see could also be otherwise. 
Everything we can describe at all could also be 
otherwise. 
There is no order of things a priori. 
5.64 Here we see that solipsism strictly carried out 
coincides with pure realism. The I in solipsism 
shrinks to an extensionless point and there remains 
the reality co-ordinated with it. 
5.641 There is therefore really a sense in which in 
philosophy we can talk of a non-psychological I. 
The I occurs in philosophy through the fact 
that the '' world is my world ". 
The philosophical I is not the man, not the 
human body or the human soul of which psy­
chology treats, but the metaphysical subject, the 
limit-not a part of the world. 
6 The general form of truth -function is : 
[p,g,N(l)]. 
This is the general form of proposition. 
6.001 This says nothing else than that every pro-
position is the result of successive applications 
of the operation N' (f) to the elementary pro­
positions. 
6.002 If we are given the general form of the way in 
which a proposition is constructed, then thereby 
we are also given the general form of the way in 
which by an operation out of one proposition 
another can be created. 
6.01 The general form of the operation O' (~) is 
therefore : [ '{, N (f) ]' ("';i) ( = [~, i, N (!) ]). 
This is the most general form of transition from 
one proposition to another. 
153 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
6.02 U nd so kommen wir zu den Zahlen: Ich definiere 
6.021 
6.022 
6.03 
6.031 
6.I 
6.II 
6.III 
o, 
x= 0 x Def. und 
", I'+ 1, 
O'O x=O x Def. 
N ach diesen Zeichenregeln schreiben wir also 
die Reihe x, O' x, O' O' ~, O' O' O' x, . . . . . 
o, 0+1, 0+1+1, 0+1+1+1, 
so : n x, n x, n x, n x, ..... 
Also schreibe ich statt ,,[ x, f, O' {]'': 
o, ", l'+I 
,,[n x, n x, n 'x]". 
U nd definiere : 
o+I=I Def. 
o + I + I = 2 Def. 
o + I + I + I = 3 Def. 
(u. s. f.) 
Die Zahl ist der Exponent eine-r Operation. 
Der Zahlbegriff ist nichts anderes, als das 
Gemeinsame aller Zahlen, die allgemeine Form 
der Zahl. 
Der Zahlbegriff ist die variable Zahl. 
U nd der Begriff der Zahlengleichheit ist die 
allgemeine Form aller speziellen Zahlengleichheiten. 
Die allgemeine Form der ganzen Zahl ist: 
[o, f, [+I]. 
Die Theorie der Klassen ist in der Mathematik 
ganz iiberfli.issig. 
Dies hangt damit zusammen, dass die Allge­
meinheit, welche wir in der Mathematik brauchen, 
nicht die z u fa 11 i ge ist. 
Die Satze der Logik sind Tautologien. 
Die Satze der Logik sagen also Nichts. {Sie 
sind die analytischen Satze.) 
Theorien, die einen Satz der Logik gehaltvoll 
erscheinen lassen, sind immer falsch. Man konnte 
z. B. glauben, dass die Worte ,,wahr" und ,,falsch" 
zwei Eigenschaften unter anderen Eigenschaften 
bezeichnen, und da erschiene es als eine merk-
154 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
6.02 And thus we come to numbers: I define 
6.021 
6.022 
6.03 
6.031 
6.l 
6.ll 
6.llI 
z=!l°'z Def. and 
O'O"'.r = n"+
1
'z Def. 
According, then, to these symbolic rules we 
·t th . rv ""'' ""'' ""'' ""'' ""'' wn e e series z, ~, z, ~, ~, z, ~, ,u ~, z . . . . . 
no, no+1, no+1+1, no+1+1+1, as : ~, z, ~, z, u z, ~, z . . . . . 
Therefore I write in place of " [z, f, Q' {] ", 
" [""'o' nv, nv+ 1, ] ,, ~, z,~, z,~, z . 
And I define : 
o+ 1 = 1 Def. 
o + 1 + 1 = 2 Def. 
o + 1 + 1 + 1 = 3 Def. 
and so on. 
A number is the exponent of an operation. 
The concept number is nothing else than that 
which is common to all numbers, the general form 
of number. 
The concept number is the variable number. 
And the concept of equality of numbers is the 
general form of all special equalities of numbers. 
The general form of the cardinal number is : 
[ o, f, f + 1]. 
The theory of classes is altogether superfluous 
in mathematics. 
This is connected with the fact that the gener­
ality which we need in mathematics is not the 
accidental one. 
The propositions of logic are tautologies. 
The propositions of logic therefore say nothing. 
(They are the analytical propositions.) 
Theories which make a proposition of logic 
appear substantial are always false. One could 
e.g. believe that the words '' true" and '' false " 
signify two properties among other properties, 
and then it would appear as a remarkable fact 
:x55 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
wiirdige Tatsache, dass jeder Satz eine dieser 
Eigenschaften besitzt. Das scheint nun nichts 
weniger als selbstverstandlich zu sein, ebensowenig 
sel bstverstandlich, wie etwa der Satz, ,,alle Rosen 
sind entweder gelb oder rot" klange, auch wenn er 
wahr ware. Ja, jener Satz bekommt nun ganz 
den Charakter eines naturwissenschaftlichen Satzes 
und dies ist das sichere Anzeichen dafiir, dass er 
falsch aufgefasst wurde. 
6. 112 Die richtige Erklarung der logischen Satze 
muss ihnen eine einzigartige Stellung unter alien 
Satzen geben. 
6. 113 Es ist das besondere Merkmal der Iogischen 
Satze, dass man am Symbol allein erkennen kann, 
dass sie wahr sind, und diese Tatsache schliesst 
die ganze Philosophie der Logik in sich. Und 
so ist es auch eine der wichtigsten Tatsachen, dass 
sich die W ahrheit oder Falschheit der nicht­
logischen Satze n i c h t am Satz allein erkennen 
lasst. 
6. 12 Dass die Satze der Logik Tautologien sind, 
das z e i g t die formalen - logischen - Eigen­
schaften der Sprache, der Welt. 
Dass ihre Bestandteile so verkniipft eine Tauto­
logie ergeben, das charakterisiert die Logik ihrer 
Bestand teile. 
Damit Satze, auf bestimmte Art und Weise 
verkniipft, eine Tautologie ergeben, dazu miissen 
sie bestimmte Eigenschaften der Struktur haben. 
Dass sie so verbunden eine Tautologie ergeben, 
zeigt also, dass sie diese Eigenschaften der Struktur 
besitzen. 
6. 1201 Dass z. B. die Satze ,,p" und ,, ,.,,, p" in der 
Verbindung,,,.,,, (p. - p)" eine Tautologie ergeben, 
zeigt, dass sie einander widersprechen. Dass 
die Satze ,,p:::Jq", ,,p" und ,,q" in der Form 
,,(p:::Jq) . (p) : :::> : ( q)" miteinander verbunden eine 
Tautologie ergeben, zeigt, da~s q aus p und P:::)(J 
156 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
that every proposition possesses one of these 
properties. This now by no means appears self­
evident, no more so than the proposition '' All 
roses are either yellow or red" would sound even 
if it were true. Indeed our propositio_n now gets 
quite the character of a proposition of natural 
science and this is a certain symptom of its being 
falsely understood. 
6. 112 The correct explanation of logical propositions 
must give them a peculiar position among all 
p roposi ti ons. 
6. 113 It is the characteristic mark of logical pro-
positions that one can perceive in the symbol alone 
that they are true ; and this fact contains in itself 
the whole philosophy of logic. And so also it is 
one of the most important facts that the truth or 
falsehood of non-logical propositions can not be · 
recognized from the propositions alone. 
6. 12 The fact that the propositions of logic are 
tautologies shows the formal-logical-properties 
of language, of the world. 
That its constituent parts connected together in 
this way give a tautology characterizes the logic of 
its constituent parts. 
In order that propositions connected together 
in a definite way may give a tautology they 
must have definite properties of structure. That 
they give a tautology when so connected shows 
therefore that they possess these properties of 
structure. 
6.1201 That e.g. the propositions "P" and " - p" in 
the connexion " - (p. - p)" give a tautology 
shows that they contradict one another. That the 
propositions "p:::,q ", '' p" and '' q" connected 
together in the form ~' (p':Jq). (p): ':J: (q)" give a 
tautology shows that q follows from p and p':Jq. 
157 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
folgt. Dass. ,,(x). fx: ::J: fa" eine Tautologie ist, 
dass fa aus (x) . fx folgt. etc. etc. 
6.1202 Es ist klar, dass man zu demselben Zweck statt 
der Tautologien auch die Kontradiktionen ver­
wenden kon n te. 
6.1203 Um eine Tautologie als solche zu erkennen, 
kann man sich, in den Fallen, in welchen in der 
Tautologie keine Allgemeinheitsbezeichnung vor­
kommt, folgender anschaulichen Methode be­
dienen : Ich schreibe statt ,,p", ,,q", ,,r" etc. 
,,WpF", ,,WqF", ,,WrF" etc. Die Wahrheits­
kombinationen driicke ich durch Klammern aus. 
z. B.: 
und die Zuordnung der Wahr- oder. Falschheit des 
ganzen Satzes und der Wahrheitskom binationen 
der Wahrheitsargumente durch Striche auf 
folgende Weise : 
Dies Zeichen wiirde also z. B. den Satz p::Jq 
darstellen. Nun will ich z. B. den Satz - (p . - p) 
(Gesetz des Widerspruchs) daraufhin untersuchen, 
ob er eine Tautologie ist. Die Form ,, - t" wird 
in unserer Notation 
w 
" ,,WtF" 
"-F 
158 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
That "(x) .fx: :J :fa" is a tautology shows that 
fa follows from (x) . fx, etc. etc. 
6.1202 It is clear that we could have used for this 
purpose contradictions instead of tautologies. 
6.1203 In order to recognize a tautology as such, we 
can, in cases in which no sign of generality occurs 
in the tautol6gy, make use of the following intuitive 
method : I write instead of '' p ", "q ", " r ", etc., 
"TpF", "TqF", "TrF", etc. The truth-com­
binations I express by brackets, e.g. : 
and the co-ordination of the truth or falsity of the 
whole proposition with the truth-corn bi nations of 
the truth-arguments by lines in the followirtg way : 
This sign, for example, would therefore pre­
sent the proposition P::Jq. Now I will proceed 
to inquire whether such a proposition as - (p. - p) 
(The Law of Contradiction) is a tautology. The 
form '' - e" is written in our notation 
T 
"' "T[F" 
"' F 
159 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
geschrieben ; die Form ,,f . .,," so: 
ff 
IY IJ p 
Daher lautet der Satz _, (p . ,. q) so : 
Setzen wir hier statt ,,q" ,,p'' ein und untersuchen 
die Verbindung der aussersten W und F mit den 
innersten, so ergibt sich, dass die Wahrheit des 
ganzen Satzes a 11 e n W ahrheitskombinationen 
seines Argumentes, seine Falschheit keiner der 
W ahrheitskom binationen zugeordnet ist. 
6. 121 Die Satze der Logik demonstrieren die logischen 
Eigenschaften der Satze, indem sie sie zu nichts­
sagenden Satzen verbinden. 
Diese Methode konnte man auch eine Null­
methode nennen. Im logischen Satz werden Satze 
miteinander ins Gleichgewicht gebracht und der 
Zustand des Gleichgewichts zeigt dann an, w1e 
diese Satze logisch beschaffen sein miissen. 
6.122 Daraus ergibt sich, dass wir auch ohne die 
logischen Satze auskommen konnen, da wir ja in 
einer entsprechenden Notation die forinalen Eigen­
schaften der Satze <lurch das blosse Ansehen dieser 
Satze erkennen konnen. 
160 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
the form ''f. 1'/" thus:-
Hence the proposition - (p. - q) runs. thus:-
If here we put "P" instead of" q '' and examine 
the combination of the outermost T and F with the 
innermost, it is seen that the truth of the whole 
proposition is co-ordinated with all the truth-com­
binations of its argument, its falsity with none of 
the truth-corn binations. 
6. 121 The propositions of logic demonstrate the logical 
properties of propositions, by combining them into 
propositions which - say nothing. 
This method could be called a zero-method. In 
a logical proposition propositions are brought into 
equilibrium with one another, and the state of 
equilibrium then shows how these propositions 
must be logically constructed. 
6.122 Whence it follows that we can get on without 
logical propositions, for we can recognize in an 
adequate notation the formal properties of the pro­
positions by mere inspection. 
161 L 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
6. 1221 Ergeben z. B. zwei Satze ,,p" und ,,q" in der 
Verbindung ,,p::Jq" eine Tautologie, so ist kar, 
dass q aus p folgt. 
Dass z. B. ,,q" aus ,,p::::>q. p" folgt, ersehen wir 
aus diesen beiden Satzen selbst, aber wir konnen 
es auch so zeigen, indem wir sie zu ,,p::Jq . p : ::J : q" 
verbinden und nun zeigen, dass dies eine Tauto­
logie ist. 
6. 1222 Dies wirft ein Licht auf die Frage, warum die 
logischen Satze nicht durch die Erfahrung bestatigt 
werden konnen, ebenso wenig, wie sie durch die 
Erfahrung widerlegt werden konnen. Nicht nur 
muss ein Satz der Logik durch keine mogliche Erfah­
rung widerlegt werden konnen, sondern er darf auch 
nicht durch eine solche bestatigt werden konnen. 
6. 1223 Nun wird klar, warum man oft fiihlte, a:ls waren 
die ,,logischen Wahrheiten" von uns zu ,,fordern'': 
Wir konnen sie namlich insofern fordern, als wir 
eine geniigende Notation fordern konnen. 
6.1224 Es wird jetzt auch klar, warum die Logik die 
Lehre von den Formen und vom Schliessen genannt 
wurde. 
6. 123 Es ist klar : Die logischen Gesetze diirfen nicht 
selbst wieder logischen Gesetzen unterstehen. 
(Es gibt nicht, wie Russell meinte, fiir jede 
,,Type'' ein eigenes Gesetz des Widerspruches, 
sondern Eines geniigt, da es auf sich selbst nicht 
angewendet wird.) 
6. 1231 Das Anzeichen des logischen Satzes ist n i c h t 
die Allgemeingiiltigkeit. 
Allgemein sein, heisst ja nur: Zufalligerweise 
fiir alle Dinge gelten. Ein unverallgemeinerter 
Satz kann ja ebensowohl tautologisch sein, als ein 
verallgemeinerter. 
6. 1232 Die logische Allgemeingiiltigkeit konnte man 
wesentlich nennen, im Gegensatz zu jener zufalli­
gen, etwa des Satzes ,,alle Menschen sind sterblich". 
Satze, wie Russells ,,Axiom of reducibility" sind 
162 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
6. 1221 If for example two propositions "p " and " q " 
give a tautology in the connexion ''P:::Jq", then 
it is clear that q follows from p. 
E.g. that " q " follows from '' p-:::Jq. p" we see from 
these two propositions themselves, but we can also 
show it by combining them to ''P-:::Jq .p::::): q" and 
then showing that this is a tautology. 
6. 1222 This throws light on the question why logical 
propositions can no more be empirically confirmed 
than they can be empirically refuted. Not only 
must a proposition of logic be incapable of being 
contradicted by any possible experience, but it 
must also be incapable of being confirmed by any 
such. 
6.1223 It now becomes clear why we often feel as though 
" logical truths " must be "postulated" by us. We 
can in fact postulate them in so far as we can 
postulate an adequate notation. 
6.1224 It also beco,nes clear why logic has been called 
the theory of forms and of inference. 
6. 123 It is clear that the laws of logic cannot themselves 
obey further logical laws. 
(There is not, as Russell supposed, for every 
''type" a special law of contr,1.diction ; but one is 
sufficient, since it is not applied to itself.) 
6. 1231 The mark of logical propositions is not their 
general validity. 
To be general is only to be accidentally valid 
for all things. An ungeneralized proposition can 
be tautologous just as well as a generalized 
one. 
6.1232 Logical general validity, we could call essential 
as opposed to accidental general validity, e.g. of the 
proposition "all men are mortal". Propositions 
like Russell's "axiom of reducibility" are not 
163 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
nicht logische Satze, und dies erklart unser Gefiihl : 
Dass sie, wenn wahr, so doch nur durch einen 
giinstigen Zufall wahr sein konnten. 
6.1233 Es lasst sich eine Welt denken, in der das 
Axiom of reducibility nicht gilt. Es ist aber klar, 
class die Logik nichts mit der Frage zu schaffen 
hat, ob unsere Welt wirklich so ist oder nicht. 
6.124 Die logischen Satze beschreiben das Geriist der 
Welt, oder vielmehr, sie stellen es dar. Sie 
,,handeln" von nichts. Sie setzen voraus, class 
Namen Bedeutung, und Elementarsatze Sinn 
haben : U nd dies ist ihre Verbindung mit der 
Welt. Es ist klar, class es etwas iiber die Welt 
anzeigen muss, class gewisse Verbindungen von 
Symbolen-welche · wesentlich einen bestimmten 
Charakter haben-Tautologien sind. Hierin liegt 
das Entscheidende. Wir sagten, manches an 
den Sym bolen, die wir gebrauchen, ware willkiir­
lich, manches nicht. In der Logik driickt nur 
dieses aus: Dass heisst aber, in der Logik driicken 
nicht w i r mit Hilfe der Zeichen aus, was wir 
wollen, sondern in der Logik sagt die Natur der 
naturnotwendigen Zeichen selbst aus: Wenn wirdie 
logische Syntaxirgend ei ner Zeichensprache kennen, 
dann sind bereit$ a11e Satze. der Logik gegeben. 
6. 125 Es ist moglich, und zwar auch nach der al ten 
Auffassung der Logik, von vornherein eine Be­
schreibung aller ,,wahren" logischen Satze zu geben. 
6. 1251 Darum kann es in der Logik auch n i e Uberra-
schungen geben. 
6.126 Ob ein Satz der Logik angehort, kann man 
berechnen, indem man die logischen Eigen­
schaften des Sy m b o 1 s berechnet. 
U nd dies tun wir, wen n wir einen logischen 
Satz ,,beweisen". Denn, ohne uns um einen Sinn 
und eine Bedeutung zu kiimmern, bilden wir den 
logischen Satz aus anderen nach blossen Z e i­
c hen reg e 1 n. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
logical propositions, and this explains our feeling 
that, if true, they can only be true by a happy 
chance. 
6.1233 We can imagine a world in which the axiom of 
reducibility is not valid. But it is clear that logic 
has nothing to do with the question whether our 
world is really of this kind or not. 
6. 124 The logical propositions describe the scaffolding 
of the world, or rather they present it. They 
''treat" of nothing. They presuppose that names 
have meaning, and that elementary propositions 
have sense. And this is their connexion with the 
world. It is clear that it must show something 
about the world that certain corn bi nations of sym bots 
-which essentially have a definite character-are 
tautologies. Herein lies the decisive point. We said 
that in the symbols which we use something is arbit­
rary, something not. In logic only this expresses : 
but this means that in logic it is not we who express, 
by means of signs, what we want, but in logic the 
nature of the essentially necessary signs itself 
asserts. That is to say, if we know the logical 
syntax of any sign language, then all the proposi­
tions of logic are already given. 
6. 125 It is possible, also with the old conception of 
logic, to give at the outset a description of all " true '' 
logical propositions. 
6.1251 Hence.. there can never be surprises in logic. 
6.126 Whether a proposition belongs to logic can be 
calculated by calculating the logical properties of 
the symbol. 
And this we do when we prove a logical pro­
pos1t1on. For without troubling ourselves about 
a sense and a meaning, we form the logical 
propositions out of others by mere symbolic 
rules. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
Der Beweis der logischen Satze besteht darin, 
dass wir sie aus anderen logischen Satzen durch 
successive Anwendung gewisser Operationen ent­
stehen lassen, die aus den ersten immer wieder 
Tautologien erzeugen. (U nd zwar f o 1 g e n aus 
einer Tautologie nur Tautologien.) 
Natiirlich ist diese Art zu zeigen, dass ihre 
Satze Tautologien sind, der Logik durchaus un­
wesentlich. Schon darum, weil die Satze, von 
welchen der Beweis ausgeht, ja ohne Beweis zeigen 
miissen, dass sie Tautologien sind. 
6.1261 In der Logik sind Prozess und Resultat aquiva-
lent. (Darum keine Uberraschung.) 
6.1262 Der Beweis in der Logik ist nur ein mecha-
nisches Hilfsmittel zum leichteren Erkennen der 
Tautologie, wo sie kompliziert ist. 
6.1263 Es ware ja auch zu merkwiirdig, wenn man 
einen sinnvollen Satz I o g is c h aus anderen be­
weisen konnte, und einen logischen Satz au c h. 
Es ist von vornherein klar, dass der logische 
Beweis eines sinnvollen Satzes und der Beweis in 
der Logik zwei ganz verschiedene Dinge sem 
miissen. 
6.1264 Der sinnvolle Satz sagt etwas aus, und sein 
Beweis zeigt, dass es so ist ; in der Logik ist jeder 
Satz die Form eines Beweises. 
J eder Satz der Logik ist ein in Zeichen darge­
stellter modus ponens. (U nd den modus ponens 
kann man nicht durch einen Satz ausdriicken.) 
6.1265 lmmer kann man die Logik so auffassen, dass 
jeder Satz sein eigener Beweis ist. 
6.127 Alle Satze der Logik sind gleichberechtigt, es 
gibt unter ihnen nicht wesentlich Grundgesetze 
und abgeleitete Satze. 
J ede Tautologie zeigt selbst, class sie eine 
Tautologie ist. 
6.1271 Es ist klar, dass die Anzahl der ,,logischen 
Grundgesetze" willkiirlich ist, denn man konnte 
166 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
We prove a logical proposition by creatmg it 
out of other logical propositions by applying in 
succession certain operations, which again generate 
tautologies out of the first. ( And from a tautology 
only tautologies follow.) 
Naturally this way of showing that its pro­
positions are tautologies is quite unessential to 
logic. Because the propositions, from which the 
proof starts, must show without proof that they 
are tautologies. 
6.r261 In logic process and result are equivalent. 
(Therefore no surprises.) 
6.1262 Proof in logic is only a mechanical expedient 
to facilitate the recognition of tautology, where 
it is corn plicated. 
6. 1263 It would be too remarkable, if one could prove 
a significant proposition logically from another, and 
a logical proposition also. It is clear from the 
beginning that the logical proof of a significant 
proposition and the proof £n logic must be two 
quite different things. 
6. 1264 The significant proposition asserts something, 
and its proof shows that it is so ; in logic every 
proposition is the form of a proof. 
Every proposition of logic is a modus ponens 
presented in signs. (And the modus ponens can 
not be expressed by a proposition.) 
6.1265 Logic can always ,be conceived to be such that 
every proposition is its own proof. 
6.127 All propositions of logic are of equal rank ; 
there are not some which are essentially primitive 
and others deduced from these. 
Every tautology itself shows that it is a 
tautology. 
6.1271 It is clear that the number of "primitive pro-
positions of logic" is arbitrary, for we could deduce 
167 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
die Logik ja aus Einem Grundgesetz ableiten, 
indem man einfach z. B. aus Freges Grundge­
setzen das logische Produkt bildet. (Frege wiirde 
vielleicht sagen, dass dieses Grundgesetz nun 
nicht mehr unmittelbar einleuchte. Aber es ist 
merkwiirdig, dass ein so exakter Denker wie 
\ 
Frege sich...,_auf den Grad des Einleuchtens als 
Kriterium des logischen Satzes berufen hat.) 
6. 13 Die Logik ist keine Lehre, sondern ein Spie-
gelbild der Welt. 
Die Logik ist transcendental. 
6.2 Die Mathematik ist eine logische Methode. 
Die Satze der Mathematik sind Gleichungen 
also Scheinsatze. 
6.21 Der Satz der Mathematik driickt keinen Gedan-
ken aus. 
6.211 Im Leben ist es ja nie der mathematische Satz, 
den wir brauchen, sondern wir beniitzen den 
mathematischen Satz nu r, um aus Satzen, welche 
nicht der Mathematik angeh6ren, auf andere zu 
schliessen, welche gleichfalls nicht der Mathe­
matik angehoren. 
(In der Philosophie fiihrt die Frage ,,wozu 
gebrauchen wir eigentlich jenes Wort, jenen Satz" 
immer wieder zu wertvollen Einsichten.) 
6. 22 Die Logik der Welt, die die Satze der Logik in 
den Tautologien zeigen, zeigt die Mathematik in 
den Gleichungen. 
6.23 Wenn ~wei Ausdrilcke <lurch das Gleichheits-
zeichen verbunden werden, so heisst das, sie sind 
<lurch einander ersetzbar. Oh dies aber der Fall ist 
muss sich an den beiden Ausdrticken selbst zeigen. 
Es charakterisiert die logische Form zweier Aus­
driicke, <lass sie <lurch einander ersetzbar sind. 
6.231 Es ist eine Eigenschaft der Bejahung, dass man 
sie als doppelte Verneinung auffassen kann. 
Es ist eine Eigenschaft von ,,I+ I+ I+ I", <lass 
man es als ,,(r + 1) +(I+ 1)" auffassen kann. 
168 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
logic from one primitive proposition by simply 
forming, for example, the logical product of Frege's 
primitive propositions. (Frege would perhaps say 
that this would no longer be immediately self­
evident. But it is remarkable that so exact a 
thinker as Frege should have appealed to the 
degree of self-evidence as the criterion of a 
logical proposition.) 
6. 13 Logic is not a theory but a reflexion of the 
world. 
Logic is transcendental. 
6.2 Mathematics is a logical method. 
The propositions of mathematics are equations, 
and therefore pseudo-propositions. 
6.21 Mathematical propositions express no thoughts. 
6.211 In life it is never a mathematical proposition 
which we need, but we use mathematical pro­
positions only in order to infer from propositions 
which do not belong to mathematics to others 
which equally do not belong to mathematics. 
{In philosophy the question " Why do we really 
use that word, that proposition?" constantly leads 
to valuable results.) 
6.22 The logic of the world which the propositions 
of logic show in tautologies, mathematics shows 
in equations. 
6.23 If two expressions are connected by the sign of 
equality, this means that they can be substituted 
for one another. But whether this is the case 
must show itself in the two expressions them­
selves. 
It characterizes the logical form of two expres­
sions, that they can be substituted for one 
another. 
6.231 It is a property of affirmation that it can be 
conceived as double denial. 
It is a property of "1 + 1 + 1 + 1" that it can be 
conceived as "(1 + 1) + (1 + 1) ". 
169 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
6.232 
6.2321 
6.2322 
6.2323 
6.233 
6.2331 
6.234 
6.2341 
6.24 
Frege sagt, die beiden Ausdriicke haben diesel be 
Bedeutung, aber verschiedenen Sinn. 
Das W esentliche an der Gleichung ist aber, dass 
sie nicht notwendig ist, um zu zeigen, dass die beiden 
Ausdrticke, die das Gleichheitszeichen verbindet, 
dieselbe Bedeutung haben, da sich dies aus den 
beiden Ausdriicken selbst ersehen lasst. 
U nd, dass die Satze der Mathematik bewiesen 
werden k~nnen, heisst ja nichts anderes, als dass 
ihre Richtigkeit einzusehen ist, ohne dass das, was 
sie ausdriicken, selbst mit den Tatsachen auf seine 
Richtigkeit bin verglichen werden muss. 
Die Identitat der Bedeutung zweier Ausdriicke 
Iasst sich nicht behaupten. Denn um etwas von 
ihrer Bedeutung behaupten zu konnen, muss ich 
ihre Bedeutung kennen: und indem ich ihre Be­
deutung kenne, weiss ich, ob sie dasselbe oder 
verschiedenes bedeuten. 
Die Gleichung kennzeichnet nur den Stand­
punkt, von welchem ich die beiden Ausdriicke 
betrachte, namlich vom Standpunkte ihrer Bedeu­
tungsgleichhei t. 
Die Frage, ob man zur Losung der mathemati­
schen Probleme die Anschauung brauche, muss 
dahin beantwortet werden, dass eben die Sprache 
hier die notige Anschau ung liefert. 
Der Vorgang des Rech n en s vermittelt eben 
diese Anschauung. 
Die Rechnung ist kein Experiment. 
Die Mathematik ist eine Methode d~r Logik. 
Das Wesentliche der mathematischen Methode 
ist es, mit Gleichungen zu arbeiten. Auf dieser 
Methode beruht es namlich, dass jeder Satz der 
Mathematik sich von selbst verstehen muss. 
Die Methode der Mathematik, zu ihren Glei­
chungen zu kommen, ist die Substitutionsmethode .. 
Denn die Gleichungen driicken die Ersetzbarkeit 
zweier Ausdriicke aus und wir schreiten von einer 
170 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

6.232 
6.2321 
6.2322 
6.2323 
6.233 
6.233r 
6.234 
6.2341 
6.24 
TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
Frege says that these expressions have the same 
meaning but different senses. 
But what is essential about equation is that it 
is not necessary in order to show that both ex­
pressions, which are connected by the sign of 
equality, have the same meaning: for this can be 
perceived from the two expressions themselves. 
And, that the propositions of mathematics can 
be proved means nothing else than that their 
correctness can be seen without our having to 
compare what they express with the facts as regards 
correctness. 
The identity of the meaning of two expressions 
cannot be asserted. For in order to be able to 
assert anything about their meaning, I must know 
their meaning, and if I know their meaning, I 
know whether they mean the same or something 
different. 
The equation characterizes only the standpoint 
from which I consider the two expressions, that 
is to say the standpoint of their equality of 
meaning. 
To the question whether we need intuition for 
the solution of mathematical problems it must be 
answered that language itself here supplies the 
necessary intuition. 
The process of calculation brings about just 
this intuition. 
Calculation is not an experiment. 
Mathematics is a method of logic. 
The essential of mathematical method is work­
ing with equations. On this method depends the 
fact that every proposition of mathematics must 
be self-evident. 
The method by which mathematics arrives at 
its equations is the method of substitution. 
For equations express the substitutability of 
two expressions, and we proceed from a number 
171 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
Anzahl von Gleichungen zu neuen Gleichungen 
vor, indem wir, den Gleichungen entspr~chend, 
Ausdriicke durch andere ersetzen. 
6.241 So lautet der Beweis des Satzes 2 x 2 = 4: 
(O,,f''x = nvxµ'x Def. 
Q2x2'x = (n~)2'x = (Q2)l+l'x = fl2'!)2'x = Ql+l'OI+l'x 
= (0'!1)'(0'!1)'x = O'O'O'O'x = n1+1+ 1+1'x = O''x. 
6.3 Die Erforschung der Logik bedeutet die Erfor-
schung all er Gesetzmassigkeit. Undausserhalb 
der Logik ist alles Zufall. 
6.31 Das sogenannte Gesetz der lnduktion kann 
jedenfalls kein logisches Gesetz sein, denn es ist 
offen bar ein sinnvoller Satz.-U nd darum kann es 
auch kein Gesetz a priori sein. 
6.32 Das Kausalitatsgesetz ist kein Gesetz, sondern 
die Form eines Gesetzes. 
6.32I ,,Kausalitatsgesetz", das ist ein Gattung~name. 
U nd wie es in der Mechanik, sagen wir, Minimum­
Gesetze gibt,-etwa der kleinsten Wirkung-so 
gibt es in der Physik Kausalitatsgesetze, Ges~tze 
von der Kausalitatsform. 
6.3211 Man hatja auch davon eine Ahnung gehabt, dass 
es ei n ,,Gesetz der kleinsten Wirkung'' geben milsse, 
ehe man genau wusste, wie es lautete. (Hier, wie 
immer, stellt sich das a priori Gewisse als etwas 
rein Logisches heraus.) 
6.33 Wir g I au be n nicht a priori an eiri Erhal-
tungsgesetz, sondern wir w is s en a priori die 
Moglichkeit einer logischen Form. 
6.34 Alie jene Satze, wie der Satz vom Grunde, von 
der Kontinuitat in der Natur, vom kleinsten Auf­
wande in der N atur etc. etc., alle diese sind Ein­
sichten a priori iiber die mogliche Formgebung der 
Satze der Wissenschaft. 
6.341 Die Newtonsche Mechanik z. B. bringt die Welt-
beschreibung auf eine einheitliche Form. Denken 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
of equations to new equations, replacing ex­
pressions by others in accordance with the 
equations. 
6.241 Thus the proof of the proposition 2 x 2 = 4 runs: 
(Ov)µ'z = nvxµ'z Def. 
fl2X2'z = (f2~)2'z = (f22)I+I'z = f22'f22'z = QI+PQl+l'z 
= (Q'il) '(Q'il)'z = O'il'il'il'z = Q1+ 1+1+1'z = il4'z. 
6.3 Logical research means the investigation of all 
ngularity. And outside logic all is accident. 
6.31 The so-called law of induction cannot in any 
case be a logical law, for it is obviously a sig­
nificant progosition.-And therefore it cannot be 
a law a priori either. 
6.32 The law of causality is not a law but the form 
of a law.* 
6.321 "Law of Causality" is a class name. And as 
in mechanics there are, for instance, minimum­
laws, such as that of least action, so in physics 
there are causal laws, laws of the causality 
form. 
6.3211 Men had indeed an idea that there must be 
a '' law of least action '', before they knew 
exactly how it ran. (Here, as always, the a 
priori certain proves to be something purely 
logical.) 
6.33 We do not belz"eve a priori m a law of con-
servation, but we know a priori the possibility of 
a logical form. 
6.34 All propositions, such as the law of causation, 
the law of continuity in nature, the law of least 
expenditure in nature, etc. etc., all these are 
a priori intuitions of possible forms of the pro­
positions of science. 
6.341 Newtonian mechanics, for example, brings the 
description of the universe to a unified form. 
* I.e. not the form of one particular law, but of any law of a certain 
sort (B. R. ). 
173 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
wir uns eine weisse Flache, auf der unregelmassige 
schwarze Flecken waren. Wirsagen nun: Was fiir 
ein Bild immer hierdurch entsteht, immer kann ich 
seiner Beschreibung beliebig nahe kommen, indem 
ich die Flache mit einem entsprechend feinen qua­
dratischen Netzwerk bedecke und nun von jedem 
Quadrat sage, dass es weiss oder schwarz ist. lch 
werde auf diese \Veise die Beschreibung der Flache 
auf eine einheitliche Form gebracht haben. Diese 
Form ist beliebig, denn ich hatte mit dem gleichen 
Erfolge ein Netz aus dreieckigen oder sechseckigen 
Maschen verwenden konnen. Es kann sein, dass 
die Beschreibung mit Hilfe eines Dreiecks-N etzes 
einfacher geworden ware ; das heisst, dass wir die 
Flache mit einem groberen Dreiecks-Netz genauer 
beschreiben konnten, als mit einem feineren qua­
dratischen ( oder umgekehrt) usw. Den verschiede­
nen N etzen entsprechen verschiedene Systeme der 
W eltbeschreibung. Die Mechanik bestimmt eine 
Form der Weltbeschreibung, indem sie sagt : 
Alle Satze der W eltbeschreibung miissen aus einer 
Anzahl gegebener Satze-den mechanischen Axio­
men-auf eine gegebene Art und Weise erhalten 
werden. Hierdurch liefert sie die Bausteine zum 
Bau des wissenschaftlichen Gebaudes und sagt : 
Welches Gebaude immer du auffiihren willst, jedes 
musst du irgendwie mit diesen und nur diesen 
Bausteinen zusammenbringen. 
(Wie man mit dem Zahlensystem jede beliebige 
Anzahl, so muss man mit dem System der 
Mechanik jeden beliebigen Satz der Physik 
hinschreiben konnen.) 
6.342 Und nun sehen wir die gegenseitige Stellung 
von Logik und Mechanik. (Man konnte das Netz 
auch aus verschiedenartigen Figuren etwa aus 
Dreiecken und Sechsecken bestehen lassen.) Dass 
sich ein Bild, wie das vorhin erwahnte, dur~h ein 
Netz von gegebener Form beschreiben lasst, sagt 
174 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
Let us imagine a white surface with irregular 
black spots. We now say : Whatever kind of 
picture these make I can always get as near as 
I like to its description, if I cover the surface 
with a sufficiently fine square network and now 
say of every square that it is white or black. 
In this way I shall have brought the description 
of the surface ta a unified form. This form is 
arbitrary, because I could have applied with equal 
success a net with a -triangular or hexagonal 
mesh. It can happen that the description would 
have been simpler with the aid of a triangular 
mesh; that is to say we might have described 
the surface more accurately with a triangular, 
and coarser, than with the finer square mesh, or 
vice versa, and so on. To the different networks 
correspond different systems of describing the 
world. Mechanics determine a form of descrip­
tion by saying : All propositions in the descrip­
tion of the world must be obtained in a given 
way from a number of given propositions-the 
mechanical axioms. It thus provides the bricks 
for building the edifice of science, and says : 
Whatever building thou -wouldst erect, thou shalt 
construct it in some manner with these bricks 
and these alone. 
{As with the system of numbers one must be 
able to write down any arbitrary number, so 
with the system of mechanics one must be able 
to write down any arbitrary physical proposition.) 
6.342 And now we see the relative pos1t1on of logic 
and mechanics. (We could construct the net­
work out of figures of different kinds, as out of 
triangles and hexagons together.) That a picture 
like that instanced above can be described by a 
network of a given form asserts notlting about 
175 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
iiber das Bild n i c h t s aus. (Denn dies gilt filr 
jedes Bild dieser Art.) Das aber charakterisiert 
das Bild, class es sich <lurch ein bestimmtes Netz 
von best i m m t er Feinheit v o 11 stand i g be­
schreiben lasst. 
So auch sagt es nichts iiber die Welt aus, dass 
sie sich <lurch die Newtonsche Mechanik be­
schreiben lasst; wohl aber, class sie sich so <lurch 
jene beschreiben lasst, wie dies eben der Fall ist. 
Auch das sagt etwas iiber die Welt, class sie sich 
durch die eine Mechanik einfacher beschreiben 
lasst, als <lurch die andere. 
6.343 Die Mechanik ist ein Versuch, alle w ah re n 
Satze, die wir zur Weltbeschreibung brauchen, 
nach Einem Plane zu konstruieren. 
6.343r Durch den ganzen logischen Apparat hindurch 
sprechen die physikalischen Gesetze doch von den 
Gegenstanden der Welt. 
6.3432 Wir diirfen nicht vergessen, class die Weltbe-
schreibung <lurch die Mechanik immer die ganz 
allgemeine ist. Es ist in ihr z. B. nie von 
best i m m ten materiellen Punkten die Rede, 
sondern immer n ur von i r gen d we I c hen. 
6.35 Obwohl die Fiecke in unserem Bild geome-
trische Figuren sind, so kann doch selbstver­
standlich die Geometrie gar nichts iiber ihre 
tatsachliche Form und Lage sagen. Das Netz 
aber ist re i n geometrisch, alle seine Eigenschaften 
konnen a priori angegeben werden. 
Gesetze, wie der Satz vom Grunde, etc., handeln 
vom Netz, nicht von dem, was das Netz beschreibt. 
6.36 Wenn es ein Kausalitatsgesetz gabe, so konnte 
es tauten : ,,Es gibt Naturgesetze". 
Aber freilich kann man das nicht sagen : es 
zeigt sich. 
6.361 In der Ausdrucksweise Hertz's konnte man 
sagen: Nur gesetzmassige Zusammenhange 
sind d e n k bar. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
the picture. (For this holds of every picture of 
this kind.) But this does characterize the picture, 
the fact, namely, that it can be completely de­
scribed by a definite net of definite fineness. 
So too the fact that it can be described by 
Newtonian mechanics asserts nothing about the 
world ; but this asserts something, namely, that 
it can be described in that particular way in which 
as a matter of fact it is described. The fact, 
too, that it can be described more simply by one 
system of mechanics than by another says some­
thing about the world. 
6.343 Mechanics is an attempt to construct according 
to a single plan all true propositions which we 
need for the description of the world. 
6.3431 Through their whole logical apparatus the 
physical laws still speak of the objects of the 
world. 
6.3432 We must not forget that the description of the 
world by mechanics is always quite general. 
There is, for example, never any mention of 
part£cular material points in it, but always only 
of some points or other. 
6.35 Although the spots in our picture are geometri-
cal figures, geometry can obviously say nothing 
about their actual form and position. But the 
network is purely geometrical, and all its pro­
perties can be given a priori. 
Laws, like the law of causation, etc., treat 
of the network and not of what the network 
describes. 
6.36 If there were a law of causality, it might run : 
'' There are natural laws ". 
But that can clearly not be said : it shows 
itself. 
6.361 In the terminology of Hertz we might say : 
Only uniform connexions are thinkable. 
177 M 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
6.36II Wir konnen keinen Vorgang mit dem ,,Ablauf 
der Zeit'' vergleichen-diesen gibt es nicht-, 
sondern nur mit einem anderen Vorgang ( etwa 
mit dem Gang des Chronometers). 
Daher ist die Beschreibung des zeitlichen 
Verlaufs nur so moglich, dass wir uns auf einen 
anderen Vorgang stiitzen. 
Ganz Analoges gilt fiir den Raum. Wo man 
z. B. sagt, es konne keines von zwei Ereignissen 
(die sich gegenseitig ausschliessen) eintreten, weil 
k e i n e U r sac he vorhanden sei, warum das eine 
eher als das andere eintreten solle, da handelt es 
sich in Wirklichkeit darum, <lass man gar nicht 
e in e s der beiden Ereignisse beschreiben kann, 
wenn nicht irgend eine Asymmetrie vorhanden ist. 
U nd we n n eine solche Asymmetrie vorhanden i s t, 
so konnen wir diese als U r sac he des Eintreffens 
des einen und Nicht-Eintreffens des anderen 
auffassen. 
6.36111 Das Kant'sche Problem von der rechten und 
linken Hand, die man nicht zur Deckung bringen 
kann, besteht schon in der Ebene, ja im eindi­
mensionalen Raum, wo die beiden kongruenteri 
Figuren a und b auch nicht zur Deckung gebracht 
werden konnen, ohne aus diesem Raum 
---o---x--x---o----
a b 
herausbewegt zu werden. Rechte und linke Hand 
sind tatsachlich vollkommen kongruent. U nd 
dass man sie nicht zur Deckung bringen kann, 
hat damit nichts zu tun. 
Den rechten Handschuh konnte man an die 
linke Hand ziehen, wenn man ihn im v1er­
dimensionalen Raum umdrehen konnte. 
6.362 Was sich beschreiben lasst, das kann auch 
geschehen, und was das Kausalitatsgesetz aus­
schliessen soll, das lasst sich auch nicht beschreiben. 
6.363 Der Vorgang der Induktion besteht darin, dass 
178 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
6.3611 We cannot compare any process with the 
" passage of time "-there is no such thing-but 
only with another process (say, with the move­
ment of the chronometer). 
Hence the description of the temporal sequence 
of events is only possible if we support ourselves 
on another process. 
It is exactly analogous for space. When, for 
example, we say that neither of two events (which 
mutually exclude one another) can occur, because 
there is no cause why the one should occur rather 
than the other, it is really a matter. of our being 
unable to describe one of the two events unless 
there is some sort of asymmetry. And if there is 
such an asymmetry, we can regard this as the 
cause of the occurrence of the one and of the non­
occurrence of the other. 
6.36111 The Kantian problem of the right and left hand 
which cannot be made to cover one another already 
exists in the plane, and even in one-dimensional 
space ; where the two congruent figures a and b 
cannot be made to cover one another without 
•-•o---x--x---o--•-
a 6 
moving them out of this space. The right and 
left hand are in fact completely congruent. And 
the fact that they cannot be made to cover one 
another has nothing to do with it. 
A right-hand glove could be put on a left hand 
if it could be turned round in four-dimensional 
space. 
6.362 What can be described can happen too, and 
what is excluded by the law of causality cannot be 
described. 
6.363 The process of induction is the process of 
179 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
wir das e i n fa c h s t e Gesetz annehmen, das mit 
unseren Erfahrungen in Einklang zu bringen ist. 
6.3631 Dieser Vorgang hat aber keine logische, sondern 
nur eine psychologische Begriindung. 
Es ist klar, <lass kein Grund vorhanden ist, zu 
glauben, es werde nun auch wirklich der einfachste 
Fall eintreten. 
6.36311 Dass die Sonne morgen aufgehen wird, ist eine 
Hypothese; und das heisst: wir w is s en nicht, ob 
sie aufgehen wird. 
6.37 Einen Zwang, nach dem Eines geschehen miisste, 
weil etwas anderes geschehen ist, gibt es nicht. Es 
gibt nur eine 1 o g is c he Notwendigkeit. 
6.371 Der ganzen modernen Weltanschauung•tiegt die 
6.372 
6.373 
6.374 
6.375 
6.3751 
Tauschung zugrunde, class die sogenannten Natur­
gesetze die Erklarungen der Naturerscheinungen 
se1en. 
So bleiben sie bei den Naturgesetzen als bei 
etwas U nantastbarem stehen, wie die alteren bei 
Gott und dem Schicksal. 
U nd sie haben ja beide Recht, und U nrecht. Die 
Alten sind allerdings insofern klarer, als sie einen 
klaren Abschluss anerkennen, wahrend es bei dem 
neuen System scheinen soil, als sei a 11 e s erklart. 
Die Welt ist unabhangig von meinem Willen. 
Auch wenn alles, was wir wiinschen, geschahe, 
so ware dies doch nur, sozusagen, eine Gnade des 
Schicksals, denn es ist kein 1 o g is c her Zusam­
menhang zwischen Willen und Welt, der dies 
verbiirgte, und den angenommenen physikalischen 
Zusammenhang konnten wir <loch nicht selbst 
wieder wollen. 
Wie es nur eine 1 o g is c he Notwendigkeit gibt, 
so gibt es auch nur eine 1 o g is c he U nmoglichkeit. 
Dass z. B. zwei Farben zugleich an einem Ort 
des Gesichtsfeldes sind, ist unmoglich und zwar 
logisch unmoglich, denn es ist <lurch die logische 
Struktur der Farbe ausgeschlossen. 
180 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
assuming the simplest law that can be made to 
harmonize with our experience. 
6.3631 This process, however, has no logical founda-
tion but only a psychological one. 
It is clear that there are no grounds for believ­
ing that the simplest course o{ events will really 
happen. 
6.36311 That the sun will rise to-morrow, is an hypothe-
sis ; and that means that we do not know whether 
it will rise. 
6.37 A necessity for one thing to happen because 
another has happened does not exist. There 1s 
only logical necessity. 
6.371 At the basis of the whole modern view of 
6.373 
6.374 
6.375 
the world lies the illusion that the so-called 
laws of nature are the explanations of natural 
phenomena. 
So people stop short at natural laws as at some­
thing unassailable, as did the ancients at God 
and Fate. 
And they both are right and wrong. But the 
ancients were clearer, in so far as they recognized 
one clear terminus, whereas the modern system 
makes it appear as though everything were explained. 
The world is independent of my will. 
Even if everything we wished were to happen, 
this would only be, so to speak, a favour of 
fate, for there is no logical connexion between will 
and world, which would guarantee this, and the 
assumed physical connexion itself we could not 
again will. 
As there is only a logical necessity, so there is 
only a logical impossibility. 
For two colours, e.g. to be at one place in the 
visual field, is impossible, lotically impossible, 
for it is excluded by the logical structure of 
colour. 
I8I 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
Denken wir daran, wie sich dieser Widerspruch 
in der Physik darstellt: U ngefahr so, dass ein 
Teilchen nicht zu gleicher Zeit zwei Geschwindig­
keiten haben kann ; das heisst, dass es nicht zu 
gleicher Zeit an zwei Orten sein kann; das heisst, 
dass Teilchen an verschiedenen Orten zu Einer Zeit 
nicht identisch sein konnen. 
(Es ist klar, dass das logische Produkt zweier 
Elementarsatze weder eine Tautologie noch eine 
Kontradiktion sein kann. Die Aussage, dass ein 
Punkt des Gesichtsfeldes zu gleicher Zeit zwei 
verschiedene Farben hat, ist eine Kontradiktion.) 
Alle Satze sind gleichwertig. 
Der Sinn der Welt muss ausserhalb ihrer liegen. 
In der Welt ist alles wie es ist und geschieht alles 
wie es geschieht ; es gibt in ihr keinen Wert-und 
wenn es ihn gabe, so hatte er keinen Wert. 
Wenn es einen Wert gibt, der Wert hat, so muss 
er ausserhalb alles Geschehens und So-Seins liegen. 
Denn alles Geschehen und So-Sein ist zufallig. 
Was es nicht-zufallig macht, kann nicht in der 
Welt lieg~n, denn sonst ware dies wieder zufallig. 
Es muss ausserhalb der Welt liegen. 
Darum kann es auch keine Satze der Ethik geben. 
Satze konnen nichts Hoheres ausdriicken. 
Es ist klar, dass sich die Ethik nicht aussprechen 
lasst. 
Die Ethik ist transscendental. 
(Ethik und Aesthetik sind Eins.) 
Der erste Gedanke bei der Aufstellung eines 
ethischen Gesetzes von der Form ,,du sollst .•.. " 
ist: U nd was dann, wenn ich es nicht tue? Es ist 
aber klar, class die Ethik nichts mit Strafe und 
Lohn im gewohnlichen Sinne zu tun hat. Also 
muss diese Frage nach den F o I gen einer Hand­
lung belanglos sein.--Zum Mindesten diirfen diese 
Folgen nicht Ereignisse sein. Denn etwas muss 
doch an jener Fragestellung richtig sein. Es muss 
182 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
Let us consider how this contradiction presents 
itself in physics. Somewhat as follows: That a 
particle cannot at the same time have two velo­
cities, t'.e. that at the same time it cannot be in 
two places, i.e. that particles in different places 
at the same time cannot be identical. 
(It is clear that the logical product of two 
elementary propositions can neither be a tautology 
nor a contradiction. The assertion that a point 
in the visual field has two different colours at the 
same time, is a contradiction.) 
6.4 All propositions are of equal value. 
6.4r The sense of the world must lie outside the 
world. In the world everything is as it is and 
happens as it does happen. In it there is no value 
-and if there were, it would be of no value. 
If there is a value which is of value, it must 
lie outside all happening and being-so. For all 
happening and being-so is accidental. 
What makes it non-accidental cannot lie in 
the world, for otherwise this would again be acci­
dental. 
It must lie outside the world. 
6.42 Hence also there can be no ethical propositions. 
Propositions cannot express anything higher. 
6.42r It is clear that ethics cannot be expressed. 
Ethics is transcendental. 
(Ethics and cesthetics are one.) 
6.422 The first thought in setting up an ethical law 
of the form " thou shalt . . .'' is : And what 
if I do not do it ? But it is clear that ethics has 
nothing to do with punishment and reward in the 
ordinary sense. This question as to the conse­
quences of an action must therefore be irrelevant. 
At le~st these consequences will not be events. 
For there must be something right in that formu­
lation of the question. There must be some sort 
r83 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
zwar eine Art von ethischem Lohn und ethischer 
Strafe geben, aber diese miissen in der Handlung 
selbst liegen. 
(U nd das ist auch klar, dass der Lohn etwas 
Angenehmes, die Strafe etwas Unangenehmes sein 
muss.) 
6.423 Vom Willen als dem Trager des Ethischen kann 
nicht gesprochen werden. 
U nd der Wille als Phanomen interessiert nur 
die Psychologie. 
6.43 Wenn das gute oder hose Wollen die Welt 
andert, so kann es nurdie Grenzen der Welt andern, 
nicht die Tatsachen ; nicht das, was <lurch die 
Sprache ausgedriickt werden kann. 
Kurz, die Welt muss dann dadurch iiberhaupt 
eine andere werden. Sie muss sozusagen a1s 
Ganzes abnehmen oder zunehmen. 
Die Welt des Gliicklichen ist eine andere als die 
des U ngliicklichen. 
6.431 Wie auch beim Tod die Welt sich nicht andert, 
sondern a ufhort. 
6.4311 Der Tod ist kein Ereignis des Lebens. Den 
Tod erlebt man nicht. 
W enn man unter Ewigkeit nicht unendliche 
Zeitdauer, sondern U nzeitlichkeit versteht, dann 
lebt der ewig, der in der Gegenwart lebt. 
Unser Leben ist ebenso endlos, wie unser 
Gesichtsfeld grenzenlos ist. 
6.4312 Die zeitliche U nsterblichkeit der Seele des 
Menschen, das heisst also ihr ewiges Fortleben 
,auch nach dem Tode, ist nicht nur auf keine Weise 
verbiirgt, sondern vor allem leistet diese Annahme 
gar nicht das, was man immer mit ihr erreichen 
wollte. Wird denn dadurch ein Ratsel gelost, dass 
ich ewig fort]ebe? 1st denn dieses ewige Leben 
dann nicht ebenso ratselhaft wie das gegenwartige? 
Die Losung des Ratsels des Lebens in Raum und 
Zeit liegt a us s e r ha I b von Raum und Zeit. 
184 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
of ethical reward and ethical punishment, but this 
must lie in the action itself. 
(And this is clear also that the reward must be 
something acceptable, and the punishment some­
thing unacceptable.) 
6.423 Of the will as the subject of the ethical we cannot 
speak. 
And the will as a phenomenon is only of interest 
to psychology. 
6.43 If good or bad willing changes the world, it 
can only change the limits of the world, not the 
facts ; not the things that can be expressed in 
language. 
In brief, the world must thereby become quite 
another. It must so to speak wax or wane as a 
whole. 
The world of the happy is quite another than 
that of the unhappy. 
6.431 As in death, too, the world does not change, 
but ceases. 
6.43:tI Death is not an event of life. Death is not lived 
through. 
If by eternity is understood not endless temporal 
duration but timelessness, then he lives eternally 
who lives in the present. 
Our life is endless in the way that our visual 
field is without limit. 
6.4312 The temporal immortality of the -human 
soul, that is to say, its eternal survival after 
death, is not only in no way guaranteed, but 
this assumption in the first place will not do 
for us what we always tried to make it do. 
Is a riddle solved by the fact that I survive for 
ever? Is this eternal life not as enigmatic as 
our present one? The solution of the riddle of 
life in space and time lies outside space and 
time. 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
(Nicht Probleme der N aturwissenschaft sind ja 
zu losen.) 
6.432 W i e die Welt ist, ist fiir das Hohere voll-
kommen gleichgiiltig. Gott offen hart sich nicht in 
der Welt. 
6.4321 Die Tatsachen gehoren alle nur zur Aufgabe, 
nicht zur Losung. 
6.44 Nicht w i e die Welt ist, ist das Mystische, 
sondern d a s s sie ist. 
6.45 Die Anschauung der Welt sub specie aeterni 
ist ihre Anschauung als-begrenztes-Ganzes. 
Das Gefiihl der Welt als begrenztes Ganzes ist 
das mystische. 
6.5 Zu einer Antwort, die man nicht aussprechen 
kann, kann man auch die Frage nicht aussprechen. 
Das R at s el gibt es nicht. 
Wenn sich eine Frage iiberhaupt stellen lasst, 
so k an n sie auch beantwortet werden. 
6.51 Skeptizismus ist n i c h t unwiderleglich, sondern 
offenbar unsinnig, wenn er bezweifeln will, wo 
nicht gefragt werden kann. 
Denn Zweifel kann nur bestehen, wo eine Frage 
besteht; eine Frage nur, WO eine Antwort besteht; 
und diese nur, wo etwas ge s agt werden ka n n. 
6.52 Wir fiihlen, dass selbst, wenn alle m o g 1 i c hen 
wissenschaftlichen ~ragen beantwortet sind, unsere 
Lebensprobleme noch gar nicht beriihrt sind. 
Freilich bleibt dann eben keine Frage mehr; und 
eben dies ist die Antwort. 
6.521 Die Losung des Problems des Lebens merkt 
man am Verschwinden dieses Problems. 
(1st nicht dies der Grund, warum Menschen, 
denen der Sinn des Lebens nach langen Zweifeln 
klar wurde, warum diese dann nicht sagen konnten, 
worin dieser Sinn bestand. ). 
6.522 Es gibt allerdings U naussprechliches. Dies 
z e i g t sich, es ist das M ystische. 
6.53 Die richtige Methode der Philosophie ware 
186 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
(It is not problems of natural science which have 
to be solved.) 
6.432 How the world is, is completely indifferent for 
what is higher. God does not reveal himself t"n the 
world. 
6.432r The facts all belong only to the task and not to 
its performance. 
6.44 Not how the world is, is the mystical, but that 
it is. 
6.45 The contemplation of the world sub specie aeterni 
is its contemplation as a limited whole. 
The feeling of the world as a limited whole is 
the mystical feeling. 
6.5 For an answer which cannot be expressed the 
question too cannot be expressed. 
The riddle does not exist. 
If a question can be put at all, then it can also 
be answered. 
6.5r Scepticism is not irrefutable, but palpably sense-
less, if it would doubt where a question cannot be 
asked. 
For doubt can only exist where there is a 
question ; a question only where there is an answer, 
and this only where something can be said. 
6.52 We feel that even if all possible scientific 
questions be answered, the problems of life have 
still not been touched at all. Of course there is 
then no question left, and just this is the 
answer. 
6.52r The solution of the problem of life is seen in the 
vanishing of this problem. 
(Is not this the reason why men to whom 
after long doubting the sense of life became 
clear, could not then say wherein this sense 
consisted?) 
6.522 There is indeed the inexpressible. This shows 
itself; it is the mystical. 
6. 53 The right method of philosophy would be this. 
187 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGISCH-PHILOSOPHISCHE ABHANDLUNG 
eigentlich die: Nichts zu sagen, als was sich sagen 
lasst, also Satze der N aturwissenschaft-also etwas, 
was mit Philosophic nichts zu tun hat-, und dann 
immer, wenn ein anderer etwas Metaphysisches 
sagen wollte, ihm nachzuweisen, dass er gewissen 
Zeichen in seinen Satzen keine Bedeutung gegeben 
hat. Diese Methode ware fiir den anderen un­
befriedigend-er hatte nicht das Gefiihl, dass wir 
ihn Philosophie lehrten-aber s i e ware die einzig 
streng richtige. 
6.54 Meine Satze erlautern dadurch, dass sie der, 
welcher mich versteht, am Ende als unsinnig 
erkennt, wenn er durch sie-auf ihnen-iiber sie 
hinausgestiegen ist. (Er muss sozusagen die Leiter 
wegwerfen, nachdem er auf ihr hinaufgestiegen ist.) 
Er muss diese Satze iiberwinden, dann sieht er 
die Welt richtig. 
7 W ovon man nicht sprechen kann, dariiber muss 
man schweigen. 
188 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

TRACTATUS LOGICO-PHILOSOPHICUS 
To say nothing except what can be said, £.e. the 
propositions of natural science, £.e. something that 
has nothing to do with philosophy: and then 
always, when someone else wished to say some­
thing metaphysical, to demonstrate to him that he 
had given no meaning to certain signs in his 
propositions. This method would be unsatisfying 
to the other-he would not have the feeling that 
we were teaching him philosophy-but it would be 
the only strictly correct method. 
6.54 My propositions are elucidatory in this way: 
he who understands me finally recognizes them as 
senseless, when he has climbed out through them, 
on them, over them. (He must so to speak throw 
away the ladder, after he has climbed up on it.) 
He must surmount these propositions ; then he 
sees the world rightly. 
7 · Whereof one cannot speak, thereof one must be 
silent. 
189 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INDEX* 
(Note: Numbers in parentheses refer to paragraphs. Thus 
"6.211 (2) "indicates the second paragraph of section 6.211.) 
A priori 
all inference is, 5.133 
always proves to be something 
logical, 6.3211 
criterion of such a thought, 
3.04 
geometry is, 6.35 (1) 
intuitions, scientific principles 
as, 6.34 
no part of experience is, 5.634 
possibility of a logical form as, 
6.33 
what logic's being, consists in, 
5-4731 
Accident, none in logic, 2.012 
Aesthetics, 6.421 (3) 
Affirmation, logical property of, 
6.231 (1) 
Alphabet, 4.016 (2) 
Ambiguity, of "property" and 
other words, 4.123 (3) 
Analysis of propositions, 2.0201, 
3.201, 3.25, 4.221 (1) 
" Ambulo," a composite proposi­
tion, 4,032 (2) 
Analytical propositions, 6. 11 
Application, successive 
defined, 5.2521 (1) 
equivalent to "and so on", 
5.2523 
Argument 
function cannot be its own, 
3.333 (1) 
places, and generality, 
4.0411 (2) 
Assertion 
and deducibility, 5.124 (1) 
cannot give a sense, 4.064 
Assertion sign, meaningless, 
4.442 (2) 
Atomic ·facts (Sachverhalt) 
are combinations of things, 
2.01, 2.03 
are mutually independent, 
2.061, 2.062, 4.27 (2) 
number of combinations of, 
.4-27 (1) 
possible infinity of, 4.2211 
possibility of, 2.012, 2.0124 
possibility of occurrence of 
things in, 2.0121 (2) 
relation to elementary proposi-
tions, 4.21, 4.25 
relation to facts, 2 
relation to propositions, 4. 1 
structure of, 2.032 
Axiom of Infinity, 5.535 (2, 3) 
Axiom of Reducibility, 6.1232, 
6.1233 
Brackets, their importance, 5.461 
Calculation 
not an experiment, 6.2331 (2) 
of logical properties of sym­
bols, 6.126 (1) 
* The Editor is indebted to Professor Max Black for providing this 
Index, which was originally prepared for the use of his students at Cornell. 
University. 
191 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INDEX 
Case, the (der Fall) 
and substance, 2.024 
and the world, 1 
equated with fact, 2 
is existence of atomic facts, 2 
Causality : no causal nexus, 
5.136, 5.1361 
Causality, law of 
as limit of the describable, 
6.362 
cannot be said, 6.36 (2) 
is form of a law, 6.32, 6.321, 
6.361 
Certainty 
as limiting case of probability, 
5.152 (3) 
of truth of fautology, 4.464 (1) 
opposed to possibility and im­
possibility, 4.464 (2) 
Clarity: everything can be said 
and thought clearly, 4. n6 
Classes, theory of, superfluous in 
mathematics, 6.031 (1) 
Colloquial language. See Ordin­
ary language 
Colour 
a form of objects, 2.0251 
logical structure of, 6.3751 
" Complex," a formal concept, 
4.1272 (7, 8) 
Complexes 
and definition, 3.24 (4) 
given only by descriptions, 
3.24 (2) 
how perceived, 5.5423 
propositions about, in internal 
relation to a statement 
about constituents, 
3.24 (1) 
statements about, analysable, 
2.0201 
Configuration of objects, 2.0272, 
3.21. (See also Structure) 
Constant: expression as, 
3.312 (2) 
Contradiction. (See also Denial) 
defined, 4.46 (4) 
limiting case of combination of 
symbols, 4.466 (4) 
not a picture of reality, 4.462 
shared by propositions, 5.143 
Correspondence 
between objects and picture 
elements, 2.13 
of configuration of simple signs 
and objects, 3.21 
Darwinian theory, irrelevant to 
philosophy, 4. n 22 
Death, 6.431, 6.43n 
Deducibility 
and identity, 5.141 
and obviousness, 5.1363 
and relative content, 5.14 
and structure, 5.13 
relation to form, illustrated, 
5.13n (1) 
Definition 
as analysis, 3.26 
as rule of translation, 3.343 
effect upon signification, 
3.261 (1) 
how symbolized, 4.241 (3) 
of a symbol for a complex,· 
3.24 (4) 
of ' complete analysis ' (of 
proposition), 3.201 
of ' contradiction ', 4.46 (4) 
of' expression', 3.31 (1) 
of 'feature', 4.1221 
of' form', 2.033 
of ' form of an object ', 2.0141 
of 'form of representation', 
2.151 
of 'formal concept', 4.126 (1) 
of 'formal series', 4.1252 (1) 
of• independent propositions', 
5.152 (1) 
of_ ' logical picture ', 2.181 
of ' logical place ', 3.41 
of 'measure of probability', 
5-1 5 
of' name', 3.202 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INDEX 
of ' negation' (in sense of 
simultaneous denial), 5.5 
of 'number', 6.022 (2) 
of numbers, 6.02 
of 'operation', 5.23 
of ' propositional sign ', 3. 12 
of 'propositional variable ', 
3.313 (3) 
of 'range', 4.463 
of ' sign ', 3.32 
of ' simple sign ', 3.201 
of 'structure, (of atomic facts) 
2.032 
of ' successive application , , 
5.2521 (1) 
of ' successor ', 4.1252 (4) 
of ' tautology , , 4.46 (4) 
of 'truth-grounds', 5.101 (2) 
of ' truth-operations ', 5.234 
of ' truth-possibilities , , 4.3 
only an expedient in presenta-
tion, 4.242 
rules for, 5.451 (2) 
Denial 
as determining logical place, 
4.0641 
by means of what is common 
to all negation symbols, 
5.512 (2) 
is an operation, 5.2341 (2) 
needs a single definition, 5.451 
possibility of, presupposed in 
affirmation, 5.44 (4) 
occurrence of, does not char­
acterize sense, 4.0621 (2) 
reverses sense, 5.2341 (3) 
Denial, sign of 
corresponds to nothing in 
reality, 4.0621 
does not refer to an object, 
5.44 (5) 
Description 
of a fact by a proposition, 
4.023 (3) 
of an object, 4.023 (4) 
of complex, 3.24 (2) 
of expressions, 3.33 
of propositions, 3.317 (2) 
of reality by a proposition, 
4.023 (2) 
of states of affairs, 3.144 
of the world 
Descriptions, systems of, 6.341 
Distinguishability, 2.02331 
"Dynamic models", 4.04 (2) 
Ego, the non-psychological, 5.641 
Elucidation of primitive signs, 
3.263 
Equality, meaning of sign of, 
6.23 (1) 
Equations 
as expressing substitutability, 
6.24 (2) 
characterize a standpoint, 
6.2323 
not needed to express syn­
onymity, 6.232 (2) 
Equiprobability, 5.154 (3) 
Essence 
and general form of proposi-
tion, 5.471 
of notation, 3.342 
of pictorial nature, 4.013 
of propositions, 3.341, 4.027, 
4.o3, 4.ol6, 4.5 (2), 5-471 
of representation, 4.016 
of symbol, 3.341, 3.343, 4.465 
of the world, 5.4711 
Essential property, of a thing, to 
be a possible constituent of 
atomic fact, 2.on 
Eternity, 6.43 n 
Ethics, 6.421, 6.422 
Existence 
of atomic facts, 2.11, 4. 1 
of logical place, 3.4 
Expedients, in logic, 5.452 
Exponent, of an operation, 
6.021 
Expressions 
all that need to be translated, 
4.025 (1) 
I93 N 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INDEX 
Expressions-continued 
guarantee existence of the 
logical place, 3.4 
have meaning only in a pro­
position, 3.314 (1) 
presented by a variable, 
3.313 (1) 
the proposition is a function of 
them, 3.318 
the term defined, 3.31 (1) 
External property, 2.01231, 
2.0233. (See also Internal 
property) 
" Fact JI, a formal concept, 
4· 1272 (7, 8) 
Facts (Tatsache). (See also States 
of affairs and Atomic facts) 
and pictures, 2. 1, 2. II 
compose the world, 1. 1, I. 2 
existence of, 2 
mutual independence of, I.21 
negative, 2.06 (2) 
required for expression of 
sense, 3.142 
the world divides into, I. 2 
totality of, I. II 
Fate, and the ancients, 6.372 (1) 
Feature, explained, 4.1221 
Features of symbols, express 
formal properties, 4.125 (6) 
Form. (See also Possibility) 
and possibility of structure, 
2.033 
and substance, 2.025 
cannot be said to have pro­
perties, 4.1241 
general, of propositions, 4.5, 
5.47 
general propositional, 
and truth operations, 5.54 
is a variable, 4.53 
logical, 2.18. (See also Proto­
type) 
and variable, 3.315 
cannot be represented in 
proposition, 4.12, 
4.121 (1) 
how determined by a sign, 
3-32 7 
of propositions, 4.0031 
of a spot, 4.063 
of expressions, 3.31 (4) 
shown by substitutability, 
6.23 (2) 
of functions, 3.333 (2) 
of objects, 2.0141, 2.0233, 
2.0251 
of propositions, 3.3n 
of reality, 2.18 
of representation 
defined, 2.151 
function of, in pictures, 2.22 
is shown forth, 2.172 
of the world consists of objects 
2.022-3 
of valuesofa variable, 4.1271 (2) 
Formal, equated with logical 
6.12 (1) 
Formal concept 
already given with object to 
which it applies, 4.12721 
as primitive idea, 4.12721 
characteristics of, 4.126 (5, 7) 
defined, 4.126 (1) 
examples of, 4. 1272 (7, 8) 
expressed by variables, 
4.126 (8), 4.127 
opposed to" proper JI concept, 
4.126 (2) 
questions about existence of, 
senseless, 4. 12 7 
Formal law, as determining for­
mal series, 5.501 (6) 
Formal properties 
connexion with structure, 
5.321 
explained, 4.122 (1) 
expressed by features of sym­
bols, 4.126 (6) 
Formal series 
defined, 4.1252 (1) 
1 94 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INDEX 
example of, 4.45 (2) 
expression for general term of, 
5.2522 
general term of, 4.1273 (2) 
needs variables, 4.1273 
of truth functions, 5.1 (1) 
progress from term to term of, 
5.252 
Freedom of the will, 5.1362 (1) 
Frege, 3.143, 3.318, 3.325, 4.063 
(1), 4.1272 (8), 4.1273, 
4.4431, 5.02 (3), 5.132 (4), 
5.42, 5.451, 5.4733 (1), 
5.521, 6.1271, 6.232 (1) 
Frequency, of occurrence of 
events, 5.154 (1) 
· · Function '', a formal concept, 
4.1273 (7, 8) 
Function 
and composition, 5.4 7 (3) 
cannot be its own argument, 
3.333, 5.251 
cannot present formal con-
cepts, 4.126 (4) 
distinct from operation, 
5.25 (3) 
elementary proposition is a, 
of names 4.24 (2) 
proposition is a, of names, 
3.318, 4.24 (2) 
Future, no knowledge of, 6.26311 
Generality 
accidental, 6.031 (2), 6.1232 
concept of, separated from 
truth-function, 5.521 
essential 
needed in mathematics, 
6.031 (2) 
opposed to accidental gener-
ality, 6.1232 
how shown, 5.1311 (2) 
how symbolized, 4.0411 
its notation contains a proto­
type, 3.24 (3), 5.522 
symbol for, occurs as an argu­
ment, 5.523 
symbolism for, makes con­
stants prominent, 5.522 
refers to logical prototype, 
5.522 
Geometrical place, and possi-
bility, 3.4II 
Geometry, as a priori, 6.35 (1) 
God, 6.432, 6.372 (1) 
" Green is green ", 3.323 (3) 
Hertz, 4.04 (2), 6.361 
Hieroglyphic writing, 4.016 
Idealists, their explanation of 
seeing spatial relations, 
4.0412 
IdP.r.tity 
cannot be asserted, 6.2322 
criticism of Russell's definition 
of, 5.5302 
how expressed, 5.53, 5.531, 
5.532, 5.532 r 
not a property, 5.473 (2) 
not a relation between objects, 
5.5301 (1) 
of sign-tokens, 3.203 
sign of 
dispensable, 5.533, 6.232 (2) 
its meaning, 4.241 (2) 
Immortality, 6.4312 (1) 
Inconceivability, and internality 
of properties, 4 .1 2 3 
Independence, of propositions, 
defined, 5.152 (1) 
Index (of a name) 
explained, 5.02 
confused with argument, 
5.02 (3) 
Induction 
as assumption of simplicity, 
6.363 
has only psychological founda­
tion, 6.3631 (1) 
1 95 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INDEX 
Induction, law of 
not a logical law, 6.31 
not a priori, 6.31 
Inference 
is a priori, 5.133 
"Laws of", senseless, 5.132(4) 
Internal properties. (See also 
Formal properties) 
and features, 4.1221 
and inconceivability, 4.123 (1) 
and structure, 4.122 (2) 
knowledge of, needed for know-
ledge of objects, 2.01231 
of a proposition, describe 
reality, 4.023 (4) 
of possible states of affairs, 
4.124 (1), 4.125 
their holding is shown, 4.122(4) 
Internal relations 
and deducibility, 5.131 
and definition of formal series, 
4.1252 (1) 
between structures of proposi­
tions, 5.2 
equivalent to operations, 5.232 
of statement about a complex 
to a statement about con­
stituents, 3.24 (1) 
representation as an instance, 
4.014 (1) 
Internal similarity, 4.0141 
" Is," meanings of, 3.323 (2) 
Language (See also Ordinary 
Language) 
able to express every sense, 
4.022 (1) 
as supplying intuition, 6.233 
"critique of", 4.0031 
disguises the thought, 4.002 (4) 
is totality of propositions, 
4.001 
limits of my, 5.6 
logic of, 4.002 (3), 4.003 (1) 
translation of, 3.343 
Law of least action, 6.3211 
Laws of nature, not explanations, 
6.371 
Life, the problem of, 6.52, 6.521 
Logic. (See also Logical proposi­
tions) 
all is accident outside, 6.3 
all questions of, answerable 
off-hand, 5.551 (1) 
and mechanics, 6.342 
application of, 5.5521, 5.557 
as all-embracing, world re-
flecting, 5.5 u 
calculation in, 6.121 (1) 
cannot cross limits of world, 
5.61 (3) 
deals with possibilities, 2.0121 
(3), 5.555 (3) 
every proposition of, its own 
proof, 6. 1265 
expedients in, 5.452, 5.5n 
impossibility of " contradict­
ing ", 3.03-3.032, 5.4731 
impossibility of describing the 
world in, 5.61 (2) 
irrelevance of monism and 
dualism to, 4.128 (2) 
is a priori, 5.4541 (2), 5.4731, 
5.551 (1) 
is transcendental, 6.13 (2) 
its propositions are tautologies, 
6.1, 6.22 
laws of, do not obey further 
laws, 6.123 (1) 
must take care of itself, 
5.454 (1) 
no classification in, 5.454 (1) 
no mistakes possible in, 
5.473 (3) 
no numbers in, 5.453 (2) 
no primitive propositions in, 
6.127 (1) 
no surprises in, 6.1251 
not a natural science, 6.II 1 
not a theory, 6.13 (1) 
nothing accidental in, 2.012 
of constituents, shown by 
tautologies, 6.12 (2) 
196 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INDEX 
of facts, cannot be represented, 
4.0312 (2) 
possibility in, 5.473 (2) 
precedes every experience, 
5.552 (2) 
" primitive propositions " of, 
arbitrary in number, 
6.1271 
problems of, concrete, 
5.5563 (2) 
process and result equivalent 
in, 6.1261 
proof in, 6.126 (2-4), 6.1262 
propositions of, say nothing, 
5.43 (2) 
reflects the world, 6. 13 ( 1) 
role of postulation in, 6. 1223 
searches for regularity, 6.3 
simplicity of, 5.4541 
whole philosophy of, 6.113 
why called theory of forms, 
6.1224 
"zero-method" in, 6.121 (2) 
Logical, equated with formal, 
6.12 (1) 
Logical constants 
disappearance of, 5.441 
do not represent, 4.0312 (2) 
only one of them, 5.47 (4), 
5-472 
there are none, 5.4 
Logical coordinates, as deter­
mining logical place, 3.41 
Logical forms, are anumerical, 
4.128 (1) 
Logical grammar, 3.325 (1) (See 
also Logical syntax) 
" Logical objects ", there are no, 
4·441, 5.4 
Logical place (See also Logical 
space) 
denial as determining, 4.0641 
proposition determines one, 
3.42 (1) 
relation to propositional sign 
and logical coordinates, 
3.4I 
Logical properties of proposi­
tions, demonstrated by pro­
ducing tautologies, 6.121 
Logical propositions 
as forms of a proof, 6.1264 (1) 
as modus ponens, 6. 1264 (2) 
connection with the world of, 
6.124 
dispensable, 6.122 
have a peculiar place among 
all propositions, 6.112 
have equal rank, 6.127 (1) 
not confirmable by experience, 
6.1222 
not distinguished by generality, 
6.1231 (1) 
present the scaffolding of the 
world, 6.124 
their truth discernible in the 
symbol, 6.113 
" treat " of nothing, 6.124 
Logical space ( See also Logical 
place) 
and the world, 1. 13 
everything is in, 2.013 
facts in, 1.13 
given with every proposition, 
3.42 (1) 
pictures present facts in, 2.11, 
2.202 
place in, determined by pro­
position, 3.4 
Logical syntax 
and rules of translation, 3.344 
implies all logical propositions, 
6.124 
meanings of signs plays no role 
in, 3.33 
need for obeying, 3.325 (1) 
rules of, 3.334 
Mathematics 
has no need for theory of 
classes, 6.031 (1) 
intuition in, place of, 6.233 
is a logical method 6.2 (1), 
6.234 
197 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INDEX 
Ma.thematics-continued 
method of, working with equa­
tions, 6.2341 
no accidental generality in, 
6.031 (2) 
proof in, significance of, 6.2321 
propositions of 
all self-evident, 6.2341 
are equations, 6.2 (2) 
as links in inference, 6. 2 11 
express no thoughts, 6. 2 1 
show logic of the world, 6. 2 2 
uses method of substitution, 
6.24 (1) 
Mauthner, 4.0031 
Mechanics 
its generality, 6.3432 
nature of, 6.343 
relation to logic, 6.342 
Microcosm, the, 5.63 
Meaning 
of names, 3.3 
of primitive signs, 3.263 
Modus Ponens, 6.1264 (2) 
Multiplicity 
and number of dimensions of 
signs, 5.474 
and symbol for generality, 
4.0411 (3) 
cannot be represented, 4.041 
the same in the proposition 
and the state of affairs 
represented, 4.04 
Mystical, the, 6.44, 6.45, 6.522 
Names 
are primitive signs, 3.26 
are simple signs, 3. 202 
are simple symbols, 4.24 (1) 
are unanalysable, 3.26 
cannot be defined, 3.261 (2) 
cannot express sense, 3. 142 
dispensable in describing the 
world, 5.526 
elementary proposition a con­
nexion of, 4.22 
have meaning only in context 
of proposition, 3.3 
how they occur in propositions, 
4·2 3 
index of, 5.02 (1) 
no composition essential, 
3·341 I 
resemble points, 3.144 (2) 
the " real ", 3.34II 
variable, 3.314 (2) 
Natural sciences 
are the totality of true pro­
positions, 4. 11 
do not include philosophy, 
4.lll 
Necessity : only logical neces­
sity, 6.37 
Negation (See Denial) 
Negation (=Simultaneous denial) 
introduced, 5.5 
symbolized, 5.502 
Newtonian mechanics, 6.341, 
6.342 (2) 
Nonsense (Unsinn) 
examples of, 5.5303, 5 . .535r (2) 
impossible to judge, 5.5422 
Nonsensical, logical propositions 
not, 4.4611 
Notation (See also Language) 
arbitrariness of, 3.342 
essence of, 3.342 
" Number ", a formal concept, 
4.1272 (7, 8) 
Number 
concept of, 6.022 
concept of equality of, 
6.1022 (3) 
general form of, 6.022 (1), 6.03 
Numbers 
as exponents of operation, 
6.021 
definitions of, 6.02 
ordered by internal relation, 
4.1252 (2) 
" Object ", a pseudo-concept, 
4.1272 (1) 
198 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INDEX 
Objects 
and possibility, 2.014 
are colourless, 2.0232 
are referred to by names, 
3.203, 3.22 
are simple, 2.02 
are substance of world, 2.021 
are the fixed form of the 
world, 2.023, 2.026 
as determining bounds of em-
pirical reality, 5.5561 (1) 
can only be named, 3.221 
cannot be asserted, 3.221 
common characteristics of, not 
shown by similarity of 
signs, 3.322 
configuration of, 3.21 
form of, 2.0141 
if given, all are given, 5.524 (1) 
independence of, 2.0122 
occurrence in atomic facts of, 
2.012-2.0123 
possible infinity of, 4.2211 
possibility of connexion with 
other objects, 2.0121 (4) 
senseless to speak of their 
existence, 4.1272 (5) 
senseless to speak of their 
number, 4.1272 (6) 
Obviousness, and deducibility, 
5.i363 
Occam's razor, 3.328, 5.47321 (1) 
Operations 
assert nothing, 5.25 (2) 
basis of, 5.21, 5.24 (3), 5.25 (2), 
5.251 
can cancel out, 5.253, 5.254 
charactPrize difference in 
forms, 5.24 (a), 5.241 
connexion with structure, 5.22, 
6.002 
defined, 5.23 
depend upon formal proper­
ties, 5.231 
distinct from functions, 
5.25 (3) 
examples of, 5.2341 (2) 
exponent of, 6.021 
not relations, 5.42 (1) 
number of basic, depends only 
on our notation, 5.474 
occurrence of, does not char­
acterize sense, 5. 2 5 ( 1) 
result of, can be basis of same 
operations, 5.251 
shown in a variable, 5.24 (1) 
signs for, are punctuations, 
5.4611 
successive application of, 
5.2521, 5.2523 
Ordinary language 
all its propositions completely 
in order, 5.5563 
ambiguity of, 3.323 
as complicated as the human 
organism, 4.002 (2) 
needs complicated adjust­
ments, 4.002 (5) 
Philosophy 
an activity, not a theory, 
4.112 (2) 
and the Darwinian theory, 
4.1122 
danger of confusion with psy­
chology, 4.1121 (3) 
demarcates natural science, 
4·113 
demarcates the thinkable, 
4.II4 
displays the speakable, 4.u5 
importance of possibility in, 
3.3421 
in no special relation to psy-
chology, 4.1121 (1) 
is full of confusions, 3.324 
its object the logical clarifica­
tion of thoughts, 4.112 ( 1) 
makes propositions clear, 
4.112 (4) 
mostly consists of senseless 
statements, 4.003 
not a natural science, 4. II 1 
results in elucidations, 4.112(3) 
1 99 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INDEX 
Philosophy-continued 
right method of, 6.53 
value of questions about pur­
pose of symbolism in, 
6.211 (1) 
Physical laws, refer to o bej cts of 
the world, 6.3431 
Pictures 
and logical space, 2.II 
are corn pared with reality, 
2.223 
are facts, 2. 14, 2.141 
are models of reality, 2.12, 4.01 
form of representation of, 2 .15 
have form of representation in 
common with reality, 2. 16, 
2.171 
how linked with reality, 2.151, 
2.15II, 2.201, 2.21 
include representing relation, 
2.1513 
logical 
are thoughts, 3. 
propositions as, 4.03 (3) 
the term defined, 2.181 
made by us, 2.1 
none a priori true, 2.224, 2.225 
possibility of, requires sub-
stance, 2.0212 
propositions are, 4.012 
propositions as, of reality, 
4.021 
represent their sense, 2.221 
Possibility, 2.0122-3 
and conceivability, 3.02 
and form of representation, 
2.151 
and logic, 2.012J (3), 5.473 (2) 
and logical place, 3.411 
and nature of the world, 3.3421 
of atomic facts, 2.012, 2.0124 
of connexion of things, 
2.0121 (4) 
of method of symbolizing, 
3·3421 
of projection, 3.13 (2) 
of propositions, 4.0312 ( 1) 
of states of affairs, 2.014, 2.202, 
2.203 
how shown, 5.525 (2) 
of structure is form, 2.033 
" Postulation " of " logical 
truths ", 6. 1223 
Primitive ideas, formal concepts 
as, 4.12721 
Primitive signs 
how their meanings are eluci­
dated, 3.263 
names are, 3.26 
of logic 
as forms of combination, 5.46 
need to be justified, 5.45 
rules of definition apply to, 
5-451 (2) 
signify differently from non-
primitive signs, 3.261 (2) 
Principles, scientific, as a priori 
intuitions, 6.34 
Probability 
based on series of truth­
functions, 5. 1 
does not apply to isolated pro­
positions, 5.153 
has certainty as a lim~ ting case 
of, 5. 152 (3) 
involves general description of 
propositional form, 
5.156 (2) 
is a generalization, 5.156 (1) 
measure of, defined, 5.15, 5.151 
needed in default of certainty, 
5.156 (2) 
of elementary propositions, 
5.152 (2) 
proposition 
an extract from other pro­
position~, 5.156 (5) 
has no special object, 5.1511 
relation of experience to, 
5. 154 (4) 
relation to certainty, possi-
bility, impossibility, 
4.464 (2) 
unit of, 5. 155 
200 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INDEX 
Problems, the deepest, are no 
probl~ms, 4.003 (3) 
Projection 
and translation, 4.0141 
method of, as thought, 3.n (2) 
possibility of, belongs to pro-
position, 3.13 (2) 
Proof 
in logic, a mechanical ex­
pedient, 6. 1263 
of significant proposition con­
trasted with proof in 
logic, 6. 1263 
of twice two, 6.241 
Propositional connexion (Satzver­
band), 4.221 
Propositional sign 
as determining logical place, 
3.41 
cannot contain itself, 3.332 
defined, 3. 12 
elements of, 3.2 
essential nature of, 3.1431 (1) 
is a fact, 3.14, 3.143 
relation of, to proposition, 
3.12 
sense of, needs no explanation, 
4.02, 4.021 
truth table as, 4.44, 4.442 (r) 
Propositional variable · 
bar symbol for, 5.501 
defined, 3.313 (3) 
determination of values of, 
3.316 
expresses a · formal concept, 
4.126 (8) 
every variable conceivable as, 
3.314 
relation to logical form, 3.315 
Propositions 
accidental features of, 3.34 
about complexes, 3.24 
all of equal value, 6.4 
always complete pictures, 
5.156 (4) 
analysis of, 3.201, 3.25, 
4.221 (1) 
201 
and truth possibilities of ele­
mentary prepositions, 4.4 
are articulated, 3.141 (2), 3.251, 
4.032 (1) 
are compared with reality, 
4,o5 
are composite, 4.032 (2), 
5.5261 (1) 
are descriptions of facts, 
4.023 (3) 
are expressions, 3.31 (2) 
are expressions of their truth 
conditions, 4.431 (2) 
are generalizations of element­
ary propositions, 4.52 
are pictures of reality, 4.021 
are truth-functions of ele­
mentary propositions, 5 ( 1) 
as configurations of objects, 
2.0231 
as functions of expressions, 
3.318 
as logical pictures, 4.01 (1), 
4.03 (3) 
as models of reality, 4.01 (2) 
can say nothing about them­
selves, 3.332 
cannot assert their own truth, 
4.442 (3) 
cannot be given sense by asser-
tion, 4.064 
cannot represent logical form, 
4.12 (1), 4.121 
completely generalized, 
5.526 (1), 5.5261 (.1) 
content of, 3.13 (4) 
denial of, 4.0641 
determine one logical place 
eac4, 3.42 
elementary 
are truth-arguments of pro­
position, 5.01 
assignment of truth-values 
to, describes the world, 
4.26 
cannot be gi".'en a priori, 
5.5571 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INDEX 
Propositions-continued 
cannot contradict other ele­
mentary propositions, 
4.21I 
composition of, cannot be 
given, 5.55 (2) 
concept of, 5.555 (1) 
consist of names, 4.22, 
5.55 (2) 
contain all logical opera­
tions, 5.47 (2) 
forms of, no hierarchy of, 
5.556 
if given, all are given, 
5.524 (2) 
importance of, for under­
standing other proposi­
tions, 4.4II 
how symbolized, 4.24 (2, 3) 
logically independent, 5.134 
possible forms of, 5.55 
purely logical grounds for 
there being, 5.5562 
range allowed by, 5.5262 (1) 
relation of truth possibilities 
of, to other proposi­
tions, 4.4 
relation to atomic facts, 
4.21, 4.25 
relation to tautology and 
contradiction, 6.3751 (3) 
essential features of, 3.34 
expression of thoughts in, 3.2 
follow from elementary pro-
positions, 4.52 
general form of, 5.47 (5) 
logical form of, 4.0031 
most general form of, 4.5, 6 
need only ' yes ' or ' no ' to fix 
reality, 4.023 (1) 
neither probable nor improb­
able in themselves, 5.153 
number of possibilities of 
agreement with truth­
possibilities of elementary 
propositions, 4.42, 4.45 (1) 
opposition of, 5.513 (2) 
present existence and non­
existence of atomic facts, 
4.1 
presuppositions of, 5.5151 (3) 
"primitive", 5.43 (1) 
probability, have no special 
object, 5.15u 
psychological, 5.541, 5.542 
reach through whole logical 
space, 3.42 (3) 
relation of, to propositional 
sign, 3.12 
resemble arrows, 3.144 (2) 
say how, not what a thing is, 
3.221 
sense of, unchanged by adjoin-
ing tautology, 4.465 
show their sense, 4.022 
show what they say, 4.461 ( 1) 
significant 
are thoughts, 4 
content of, 3.13 (4, 5) 
what is common to, illustrated, 
5.513 (1) 
what they say, 4.022 (2) 
what logical space given with, 
3.42 (1) 
have elementary propositions 
as truth-arguments, 5.01 
have sense independent of 
facts, 4.061 
Prototype 
have truth-value because pic­
tures of reality, 4.06 
how understood, 4.024 
in them names stand for ob­
jects, 3.22 
logical (See Logical proposi­
tions) 
202 
and logical form, 3.315 
and symbolism for generality, 
5.522 
and variable, 3.315 
examples of, 3.333 (1), 
5.5351 (1) 
in notation for generality, 
3.24 (3), 5.522 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INDEX 
Pseudo-concept, 4.1272 ( 1) 
proposition and thing as, 
5.5351 (1) 
Pseudo-propositions, 5.535 (1) 
arising from use of pseudo­
concepts, 4.1272 (4) 
mathematical propositions are, 
6.2 (2) 
Psychology, and philosophy, 
4.II2I 
Range, defined, 4.463 
Reality 
as existence of atomic facts, 
2.06 (1) 
completely described by pro­
position, 4.023 (2) 
described by internal proper­
ties of proposition, 
4.023 (4) 
empirical, bounded by totality 
of objects, 5.5561 (1) 
form of, 2.18 
how linked to pictures, 2.15II-
2.15121 
logical features of, 4.023 (5) 
not pictured by tautology or 
contradiction, 4.462 
pictures are models of, 2. 12 
pictures compared with, 2.21, 
2.223 
proposition as picture of, 
4.01 (1), 4.021 
propositions are compared 
with, 4.05 
total, is the world, 2.063 
Representation, logic of, 4.015 
(See also Form of representa­
tion) 
Representing relation, belongs to 
the picture, 2. 1513 
Right and left hand, Kantian 
problem of, 6.36111 
Rules, as equivalent to symbols, 
5-51 4 
Russell, 3.318, 3.325, 3.331, 3.333 
4.0031, 4.12721, 4.1272 (8), 
4.1273, 4.241 (3), 5.02 (2), 
5-132 (4), 5-252, 5.4, 5.42, 
5.452 (2), 5.513 (3), 5.521, 
5.525, 5.5302, 5.535, 5.541 
(4), 5.5422, 5.553 (1), 6.123 
(2), 6.1232 
Russell's paradox, 3.333 (4) 
Saying 
by propositions, 4.022 (2) 
impossibility of, what we can­
not think, 5.61 (4) 
Scaffolding, logical, 3.42 (3), 
4.023 (5), 6.124 
Scepticism, 6.51 (1) 
Self-evidence (See also Obvious­
ness) 
how discarded in logic, 5.4731 
not a criterion of logical pro­
positions, 6.1271 
of mathematical propositions, 
6.2341 
Sense 
and deducibility, 5.122 
cannot be supplied by asser­
tion, 4.064 
characterized by expressions, 
3.31 (1) 
connexion with method of pro­
jection, 3.u (2) 
equated with representation of• 
state of affairs, 4.031 (2) 
expressible only by facts, 3.142 
new, how communicated, 
4.03 (1) 
objects occurring in, 4.12II (1) 
of propositional sign, needs no 
explanation, 4.02, 4.021 
of propositions 
and possibilities of existence 
of atomic facts, 4.2 
contained in sense of other 
propositions, 5.122 
expressed by spatial posi­
tion, 3.1431 (2) 
form only of, contained in 
proposition, 3.13 (4) 
203 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INDEX 
Sense-continued 
how determined, 4.063 (2) 
independent of facts, 
4.061 (1) 
of truth-functions as a func-
tion, 5.2341 (1) 
only propositions have it, 3.3 
opposite, 4.0621 (3) 
postulate of determinateness 
of, 3.23 
requires substance, 2.0211 
reversed by denial, 5.2341 (3) 
what a picture represents is its, 
2.221 
Senseless (Sinnlos) 
distinct from nonsensical, 
4.461 (3), 4.4611 
examples of the, 4.1272 (9), 
4.1274, 5.1362 (2) 
" laws of inference " are, 
5.132 (4) 
tautology and contradiction 
are, 4.461 (3) 
Series, formal (See Formal series) 
Showing 
by tautologies and contradic-
tions, 4.461 (1) 
by structure, 4.12n (2) 
correctness of solipsism, 5.62 (2) 
examples of, 4.1211, 6.12, 
6.1201, 6.127 (2), 6.36 (2) 
excludes saying, 4.1212 
generality, 5.1311 (2) 
logic of the world, 6. 22 
logical form, 4.121 (4) 
needed for form of representa-
tion, 2.172 
of operations, 5.24 (1) 
of sense, 4,022 
that a formal concept applies, 
4.126 (3) 
that internal properties hold, 
4.122 (4) 
that one proposition follows 
from another, 4.1211 (2) 
that the world is my world, 
5.62 (3) 
the inexpressible, 6.522 
what it says, by proposition, 
4.461 (1) 
Sight, field of, 5.633, 5.6331 
Sign 
and symbol, 3.326 
application of, 3.262 
as likeness of the signified, 
4.012 
as perceptible part of symbol, 
3.II, 3.32 
cannot receive a wrong sense, 
5.4732 
complex, 3.1432 
equivalence of, 5.47321 (2) 
how it determines a logical 
form, 3.327 
identity of tokens of, 3.203 
possible, 5.473 (2) 
primitive (See Primitive signs) 
propositional (See Proposi­
tional sign) 
simple, 3.201, 3.202 
the same, may belong to 
different symbols, 3.321 
unused, 3.328 (1) 
Similes, 4.015 
Simplicity of objects, 2.02, 2.021 
" Socrates is identical ", 
5.473 (2), 5.4733 (3) 
Solipsism 
coincides with realism, 5.64 
correct in intention, 5.62 
Soul, 5.5421 (See also Subject) 
Space 
a form of objects, 2.0251 
congruence in, 6.36111 
geometrical figures cannot con­
tradict laws of, 3.032 
logical (See Logical space) 
spatial objects must lie in, 
2.0131 (1) 
spatial objects unthinkable 
apart from, 2.0121 (4) 
symmetry in, 6.3611 (3) 
visual, 2.0131 (2) 
" Spatial spectacles ", 4. 0412 
204 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INDEX 
States of affairs (Sachlage) 
can be described, not named, 
3-1 44 (1 ) 
connexion of object with, 
2.0122 
possibility of, 2.014 
Structure 
and form, 2,033 
and internal property, 4.122(2) 
connexion with operation, 5.22 
logical, 4.014 (2) 
logical relations shown by, 
4.1211 (2) 
of a picture, 2.15 (2) 
of atomic fact, 2,032, 2.034 
of propositions, and deduci­
bility, 5.13 
of propositions, stand in in­
ternal relations, 5.2 
properties of, and tautology, 
6.12 (3) 
Subject, the 
and the body, 5.631 (2) 
does not belong to the world, 
5.632 
is a limit of the world, 5.632, 
5.641 (3) 
no such thing exists, 5.542 (1), 
5.631 (1) 
Substance 
of the world, identified with 
objects, 2.021 
exists independently of what 
is the case, 2.024 
is form and content, 2.025 
Successor, definition of, 4.1252(4) 
Superstition, 5.1361 (2) 
Symbolizing, methods of, 3.322 
Symbols 
and signs, 3.326 
as equivalent to rules, 5.541 
composite, criterion of, 
5.5261 (2) 
difference of, 3.323 (3) 
different, may have common 
sign, 3.321 
equated with expressions, 3.31 
essential features of, 3.34 
for complexes, how defined, 
3.24 (4) 
have sign for perceptible part, 
3-32 
presuppositions of, 5.5151 (3) 
what signifies in, 3.344 
Tautology 
a limiting case of corn bina tions 
of symbols, 4.466 (4) 
an ungeneralized proposition 
can be, 6.1231 (2) 
and properties of structure, 
6.12 (3) 
as showing logic of the world, 
6.22 
defined, 4.46 (4) 
derivation of tautology from, 
6.126 (3) 
effect of ad joining, to a pro­
position, 4.465 
follows from all propositions, 
5.142 
has no truth conditions, 
4.461 (2) 
how used in demonstrating 
logical properties, 6.121 
is analytical proposition, 6. 11 
is without sense, 4.461 (3) 
its truth certain, 4.464 (1) 
logical proposition is, 6. 1 
method for recognizing, 6. 1203 
not a picture of reality, 4.462 
not nonsensical, 4.4611 
probability of, 5.152 (4) 
say.s nothing, 4.461 (1), 5.142, 
6.11 
shared by propositions, 
5.143 (1) 
shows that it is a tautology, 
6.127 (2) 
Theory of knowledge, how re­
lated to psychology and 
philosophy, 4.1121 (2) 
Theory of types, 3.331-3.333, 
5.252, 6.123 (2) 
205 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INDEX 
Things (See Objects) 
Thinkable 
and picturable, 3.001 
and possible, 3.02 
is demarcated by philosophy, 
4.114 
only uniform connexions are, 
6.361 
Thought 
a priori, criterion of, 3.04 
as a logical picture, 3 
as method of projection, 
3.II (2) 
contains possibility of a state 
of affairs, 3.02 (r) 
disguised by language, 4.002(4) 
expressed by signs, 3.1 
form of, 4.002 (4) 
how expressed in propositions, 
3.2 
is applied propositional sign, 
3.5 
is the significant proposition, 4 
Time 
a form of objects, 2.0251 
" passage " of, 6.3611 (1) 
sequence of events in, 
6.3611 (I, 2) 
temporal objects unthinkable 
apart from, 2.0121 (4) 
Totality of atomic facts, 2.05 
Translation 
and projection, 4.0141 
as criterion for " what is 
common '' to symbols, 
3.343 
Truth 
and falsity, not coordinate 
relations, 4.061 
concept of, explained, 4.063 
concept of, Frege's account 
false, 4-43 r (3) 
its connexion with pictorial 
nature of proposition, 4.06 
not a property, 6.111 
Truth-arguments, elementary 
propositions are, 5.01 
Truth-conditions 
groups of, can be ordered in a 
series, 4.45 
how expressed, 4.442 (4) 
of propositions, and truth 
possibilities of elementary 
propositions, 4.41 
symbolism for, 4.43 
relation to truth-possibilities, 
4.431 (1) 
Truth-functions 
and truth-operations, 5.3 (2, 3) 
are results of operations, 5.234 
can be ordered in series, 5.1 (1) 
general form of, 6 ( 1) 
not material functions, 5.44 (1) 
notations for, 3.3441 
of two variables, itemized, 
5.101 (1) 
result from application of 
simultaneous denial, 
5.5 (1 ) 
the term introduced, 5. 
Truth-grounds 
and deducibility, 5.II, 5.12, 
5.121 
as measure of probability, 5.15, 
5.151 
defined, 5. 101 (2) 
Truth-operations 
and truth-functions, 5.3 (2, 3) 
defined, 5.234 
T ru th-possi bili ties 
defined, 4.3 
of combinations of elementary 
propositions, 4.28 
schemata for, 4.31 
Understanding 
depends on understanding 
elementary propositions, 
4·411 
of general propositions depends 
on understanding elemen­
tary propositions, 4.41 I 
of names, 4.243 
of propositions, 4.02, 4.024 
206 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INDEX 
of synonyms, 4.243 
Unspeakable, the, and philos­
ophy, 4.115 
Value, 6.4, 6.41 
Variable (See also Propositional 
variable) 
an expression presented by, 
3-313 
is sign of formal concepts, 
4.1271 . 
can be regarded as proposi-
tional variable, 3.314 
determination of values of, 
3-31 7 
form of, 4.1271 (2) 
general propositional, 5.24~ 
general propositional form 1s a, 
4.53 
in expression of general term 
of series, 5.2522 
names, as sign for pseudo-con­
cept, object, 4.1272 (1) 
name, can be conceived as pro­
positional variable, 
3-31 4 (2 ) 
needed for expressing general 
term of formal series, 
4.1273 (1) 
propositional (See Proposi­
tional variable) 
used for operations, 5.24 (1) 
values of, 3.315, 5.501 (6) 
Whitehead, 5.452 (2), 5.252 
Will, the, 6.423, 6.43 
Words, cannot occur both in and 
out of propositions, 2.0122 
World, my 
I am, 5.63 
limits of, 5.62 (3) 
World, the 
and life are one, 5.621 
and logical space, 1 . I 3 
and what is the case, I 
completely described by total-
ity of true elementary 
propositions, 4.26 
composed of facts, not things, 
I.I 
connexion with logical pro­
positions, 6. 124 
divides into facts, 1.2 
independent of my will, 6.373, 
6.374 
information about, given by 
simplicity of description, 
6.342 (2) 
is total reality, 2.063 
is totality of atomic facts, 2.04 
its form consists of objects, 
2.023 
limits of, 5.61 (1) 
logic of, shown in tautologies 
and equations, 6.22 
logical properties of, 6. 12, 6. I 24 
names not needed for descrip­
tion of, 5.526 
nature of, revealed by 
possibility, 3.3421 
objects its substance, 2.021 . 
projective relation of propos1 .. 
tional sign to, 3.12 
sense of, 6.41 (1) 
the subject does not belong to 
it, 5.632 
" Zero-method ", in logic, 
6.121 (2) 
207 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

~~~~~~~x~xfi~~~~~~~~fi~~~~ 
~ ~ 
~ ~ 
~ The ~ 
a I_nternatio~al Library ~ 
~ ~ ~ PSYCHOLOGY, PHILOSOPHY ~ 
a AND SCIENTIFIC METHOD ~ 
~ ~ 
~ Edited by ~ 
•r~ C. K. OGDEN, M.A. p~ 
~ Late Fellow of Magdalene College, Cambridge ~ 
~
~ The International Library, of which over one hundred and fifty ~ 
volumes have been published, is both in quality and quantity a unique a 
achievement in this department of publishing. Its purpose is to give r'1"' 
~ expression, in a convenient form, to the remarkable developments ~ 
~ which have recently occurred in Psychology and its allied sciences. ~~ 
~ 
The older philosophers were preoccupied by metaphysical interests ~ 
which for the most part have ceased to attract the younger investi-
gators, and their forbidding terminology too often acted as a 
~ deterrent for the general reader. The attempt to deal in clear ~ 
~ 
language with current tendencies whether in England and America 
or on the Continent has met with a very encouraging reception, and 
not only have accepted authorities been invited to explain the newer ~ 
theories, but it has been found possib]e to include a number of Fl"' 
~ original contributions of high merit. ~ 
~ ~ 
~ ~ 
~ Published by ~ 
~ ROUTLEDGE & KEGAN PAUL LTD r'l" 
~ BROADWAY HOUSE: 68-74 CARTER LANE, LONDON, E.C.4. ~ 
~ 1959 ~ 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

INTERNATIONAL LIBRARY OF PSYCHOLOGY, 
PHILOSOPHY AND SCIENTIFIC METHOD 
All prices are net 
A. PSYCHOLOGY 
GENERAL AND DESCRIPTIVE 
The Mind and its Place in Nature. By C. D. Broad. £1 15s. 
Thought and the Brain. By Henri Pieron. Trans. by C. K. Ogden. £1. 
The Nature of Laughter. By J. C. Gregory. 18s. 
The Gestalt Theory and the Problem of Configuration. By Bruno 
Petermann. Illustrated. £1 5s. 
Principles of Gestalt Psychology. By K. Koffka. £2 2s. 
Analysis of Perception. By J. R. Smythies. £1 ls. 
PERSONALITY 
The Psychology of Character: with a Survey of Personality in General. 
By A. A. Roback. Revised Edition. £2 5s. 
Problems of Personality: a Volume of Essays in honour of Morton 
Prince. Edited by A. A. Roback. £1 8s. 
Personality. By R. G. Gordon. £1 3s. 
ANALYSIS 
The Practice and Theory of Individual Psychology. By Alfred Adler 
£1 5s. 
Psychological Types. By C. G. Jung. Translated with a Foreword by 
H. Godwin Baynes. £1 12s. 
Character and the Unconscious: a Critical Exposition of the Psychology 
of Freud and Jung. By J. H. van der Hoop. £1. 
The Development of the Sexual Impulses. By R. E. Money-Kyrle. 
£1. 
The Psychology of Consciousness. By C. Daly King. Introduction by 
W. M. Marston. £1. 
2 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LANGUAGE AND SYMBOLISM 
The Symbolic Process, and Its Integration in Children. By J. F. 
Markey. 14s. 
The Meaning of Meaning: a Study of the Influence of Language upon 
Thought and of the Science of Symbolism. By C. K. Ogden and 
I. A. Richards. £1 8s. 
Principles of Literary Criticism. By I. A. Richards. £1 5s. 
The Spirit of Language in Civilization. By K. Vossler. £ 1. 
CHILD PSYCHOLOGY, EDUCATION, ETC. 
The Growth of the Mind: an Introduction to Child Psychology. By 
K. Koffka. Translated by R. M. Ogden. £1 12s. 
The Language and Thought of the Child. By Jean Piaget. Preface by 
E. Claparede. Third Edition (revised and enlarged). £1 5s. 
The Child's Conception of Physical Causality. By Jean Piaget. £1 3s. 
The Child's Conception of the World. By Jean Piaget. £1 5s. 
The Child's Conception of Number. By Jean Piaget. £1 5s. 
Jodgment and Reasoning in the Child. By Jean Piaget. £1 ls. 
The Origin of Intelligence in the Child. By Jean Piaget. £1 8s. 
The Child's Conception of Space. By Jean Piaget. £2 2s. 
The Child's Conception of Geometry. By Jean Piaget, Barbel Inhelder 
and Alina Szeminska. In preparation. 
Educational Psychology: its Problems and Methods. By Charles Fox. 
Revised Edition. £1 5s. 
The Mental Development of the Child. By Karl Buhler. 15s. 
The Psychology of Intelligence. By Jean Piaget. 18s. 
The Psychology of Children's Drawings: From the First Stroke to the 
Coloured Drawing. By Helga Eng. Second Edition. £1 5s. 
ANIMAL PSYCHOLOGY, BIOLOGY, ETC. 
The Mentality of Apes, with an Appendix on the Psychology of Chim­
panzees. By W. Koehler. With 9 plates and 19 figures. £1 5s. 
The Psychology of Animals, in Relation to Human Psychology. By 
F. Alverdes. 15s. 
The Social Insects: Their Origin and Evolution. By William Morton 
Wheeler. With 48 plates. £1 8s. 
Theoretical Biology. By J. von Uexkuell. £1 4s. 
3 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

ANTHROPOLOGY, SOCIOLOGY, RELIGION, ETC. 
The Individual and the Community: a Historical Analysis of the 
Motivating Factors of Social Conduct. By Wen Kwei Liao. £1 3s. 
Crime and Custom in Savage Society. By B. Malinowski. With six 
plates. 16s. 
Sex and Repression in Savage Society. By B. Malinowski. £1 ls. 
B. PHILOSOPHY 
Philosophical Studies. By G. E. Moore. £ l 1 0s. 
The Philosophy of " As If": a System of the Theoretical, Practical, 
and Religious Fictions of Mankind. By H. Vaihinger. Translated 
by C. K. Ogden. £ 1 1 0s. 
Five Types of Ethical Theory. By C. D. Broad. £1 8s. 
Speculations: Essays on Humanism and the Philosophy of Art. By 
T. E. Hulme. Edited by Herbert Read. With a frontispiece and 
Foreword by Jacob Epstein. £1 ls. 
The Metaphysical Foundations of Modern Physical Science, with special 
reference to Man's Relation to Nature. By E. A. Burtt. £1 8s. 
Bentham's Theory of Fictions. Edited with an Introduction and 
Notes by C. K. Ogden. With three plates. £1 ls. 
Ideology and Utopia: an Introduction to the Sociology of Knowledge. 
By Karl Mannheim. £1 8s. 
The Philosophy of Peirce. Selected Writings. Edited by Justus 
Bilchler. £1 15s. 
Ethics and the History of Philosophy: Selected Essays. By C. D. 
Broad. £1 3s. 
Sense-Perception and Matter : A Critical Analysis of C. D. Broad's 
Theory of Perception. By Martin E. Lean. £1 1 s. 
Religion, Philosophy and Psychical Research: Selected Essays. By 
C. D. Broad. £1 5s. 
The Structure of Metaphysics. By Morris Lazerowitz. £1 5s. 
Methods and Criteria of Reasoning. An inquiry into the structure of 
controversy., By Rupert Crawshay-Williams. £1 12s. 
Reasons and Faiths. By Ninian Smart. £1 5s. 
4 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

LOGIC 
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. By L. Wittgenstein. German text, 
with an English Translation en regard, and an Introduction by 
Bertrand Russell, F.R.S. £ I. 
Foundations of Geometry and Induction. By Jean Nicod. With an 
Introduction by Bertrand Russell, F.R.S. £1 3s. 
The Foundations of Mathematics, and other Logical Essays. By F. P. 
Ramsey. £1 3s. 
The Nature of Mathematics: a Critical Survey. By Max Black. £1 4s. 
Logical Syntax of Language. By Rudolf Carnap. £1 1 0s. 
A Treatise on Induction and Probability. By G. H. von Wright. £1 10s. 
Bertrand Russell's Construction of the External World. By Charles A. 
Fritz, Junr. £1 3s. 
Logical Studies. By G. H. von Wright. £1 8s. 
C. SCIENTIFIC METHOD 
Scientific Thought: a Philosophical Analysis of some of its Funda­
mental Concepts in the light of Recent Physical Developments. 
By C. D. Broad. £1 12s. 
Dynamic Social Research. By John T. Hader and E. C. Lindeman. 18s. 
The Limits of Science: Outline of Logic and of the Methodology of 
the Exact Sciences. By Leon Chwistek. Introduction and 
Appendix by H. C. Brodie. £1 12s. 
HISTORY, ETC. 
An Historical Introduction to Modern Psychology. By Gardner 
Murphy. With a Supplement by H. Kluver. £2. 
The History of Materialism and Criticism of its Present Importance. 
By F. A. Lange. Introduction by Bertrand Russell. £2 10s. 
Philosophy of the Unconscious. By E. von Hartmann. £ 1 15s. 
Outlines of the History of Greek Philosophy. By E. Zeller. £1 3s. 
Psyche: the Cult of Souls and the Belief in Immortality among the 
Greeks. By Erwin Rohde. £1 15s. 
5 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

Plato's Theory of Ethics: The Moral Criterion and the Highest Good. 
By R. C. Lodge. £ 1 12s. 
Plato's Theory of Education. By R. C. Lodge, F.R.S. (Canada). £1 3s. 
Plato's Theory of Art. By R. C. Lodge. £1 5s. 
The Philosophy of Plato. By R. C. Lodge. £1 8s. 
Plato's Phaedo. A translation with an Introduction, Notes and 
Appendices, by R. S. Bluck. £1 ls. 
Plato's Theory of Knowledge. The Theaetetus and the Sophist of Plato. 
Translated, with a Running Commentary, by F. M. Cornford. 
£1 8s. 
Plato's Cosmology: The Timaeus of Plato. Translated, with a Running 
Commentary, by F. M. Cornford. £1 12s. 
Plato and Parmenides. Parmenides' "Way of Truth " and Plato's 
" Parmenides ". Translated with an Introduction and Running 
Commentary, by F. M. Cornford. £1 4s. 
Aristotle's Theory of Contrariety. By John P. Anton. £1 5s. 
A LIST OF BOOKS PUBLISHED IN 1HE LIBRARY BUT AT PRESENT OUT OF PRINT 
Analysis of Matter. By B. Russell. 
Art of Interrogation. By E. R. Hamilton. 
Biological Memory. By Eugenio Rignano. 
Biological Principles. By J. H. Woodger. 
Chance Love and Logic. By C. S. Peirce. 
Charles Peirce's Empiricism. By Justus Buchler. 
Child's Discovery of Death. By Sylvia Anthony. 
Colour Blindness. By Mary Collins. 
Colour and Colour Theories. By Christine Ladd-Franklin. 
Communication. By K. Britton. 
Comparative Philosophy. By P. Masson-Oursel. 
Concentric Method. By M. Laignel-Lavastine. 
Conditions of Knowing. By Angus Sinclair. 
Conflict and Dream. By W. H. R. Rivers. 
Conscious Orientation. By J. H. Van der Hoop. 
Constitution-Types in Delinquency. By W. A. Willemse. 
Contributions to Analytical Psychology. By C. G. Jung. 
Creative Imagination. By June E. Downey. 
Crime, Law and Social Science. By J. Michael and M. J, Adler. 
6 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

Dialectic. By M. J. Adler. 
Doctrine of Signatures. By Scott Buchanan. 
Dynamics of Education. By Hilda Taba. 
Effects of Music. By M. Schoen. 
Eidetic Imagery. By E. R. Jaensch. 
Emotion and Insanity. By S. Thalbitzer. 
Emotions of Normal People. By W. M. Marston . 
Ethical Relativity. By B. Westermarck. 
Examination of Logical Positivism. By Julius Weinberg. 
Growth of Reason. By F. Lorimer. 
History of Chinese Political Thought. By Liang Chi-Chao. 
How Animals Find their Way About. By E. Rabaud. 
Human Speech. By Sir Richard Paget. 
Infant Speech. By M. M. Lewis. 
Integrative Psychology. By W. M. Marston et al. 
Invention and the Unconscious. By J.M. Montmasson. 
Law and the Social Sciences. By H. Cairns. 
Laws of Feeling. By F. Pau.lhan. 
Measurement of Emotion. By W. Whately Smith. 
Medicine, Magic and Religion. By W. H. Rivers. 
Mencius on the Mind. By I. A. Richards. 
Mind and its Body. By Charles Fox. 
Misuse of Mind. By K. Stephen. 
Moral Judgment of the Child. By Jean Piaget. 
Nature of Intelligence. By L. L. Thurstone. 
Nature of Learning. By G. Humphrey. 
Nature of Life. By E. Rignano. 
Neural Basis of Thought. By G. G. Campion and Sir G. E. Smith. 
Neurotic Personality. By R. G. Gordon. 
Philosophy of Music. By W. Pole. 
Physique and Character. By B. Kretschmer. 
Pleasure and Instinct. By A. H. B. Allen. 
Political Pluralism. By Kung Chuan Hsiao. 
Possibity. By Scott Buchanan. 
Primitive Mind and Modern Civilization. By C. R. Aldrich. 
Principles of Experimental Psychology. By H. Pieron. 
Problems in Psychopathology. By T. W. Mitchen. 
Psychology and Ethnology. By W. H. R. Rivers. 
7 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com

Psychology and Politics. By W. H. R. Rivers. 
Psychology of Emotion. By J. T. MacCurdy. 
Psychology of Intelligence and Will. By H. G. Wyatt. 
Psychology of Men of Genius. By E. Kretschmer. 
Psychology of a Musical Prodigy. By G. Revesz. 
Psychology of Philosophers. By Alexander Herzberg. 
Psychology of Reasoning. By E. Rignano. 
Psychology of Religious Mysticism. By J. H. Leuba. 
Psychology of Time. By Mary Sturt. 
Religious Conversion. By Sante de Sanctis. 
Sciences of Man in the Making. By E. A. Kirkpatrick. 
Scientific Method. By A. D. Ritchie. 
Social Basis of Consciousness. By T. Burrow. 
Social Life in the Animal World. By F. Alverdes. 
Social Life of Monkeys and Apes. By S. Zuckerman. 
Speech Disorders. By S. M. Stinchfield. 
Statistical Method in Economics and Political Science. By P. Sargant 
Florence. 
Technique of Controversy. By B. B. Bogoslovsky. 
Telepathy and Clairvoyance. By R. Tischner. 
Theory of Legislation. By Jeremy Bentham. 
Trauma of Birth. By 0. Rank. 
What is Value? By Everett M. Hall. 
17859. PRINTED 15Y BRADLEY BROTHERS LTD 109 KINOIWAY LONDON WC2 AND ASHFORD KENT 
Downloaded from https://www.holybooks.com